narrative
When their duties on the Oxford circuit were over in 1788, Abbot and his friend Hugh Leycester made a rapid tour of Italy, which Abbot succinctly recorded in a travel journal (Abbot jnl.MSS). They had prepared a notebook of personal observations on the route (drawn from accounts by Oswald Leycester, Henry Bankes, John Mitford, and [the Rev. George?] Chamberlayne), and took Louis Dutens's Itinéraire of 1786. In Florence they stayed at Megit's hotel, and Abbot disarmingly observed at Lord Cowper's that 'The Pictures seemed to be good but they were not our object'. Abbot was dismayed by the Campagna ('the total Reverse of Milton's Description'). At Rome, where they stayed at Margherita's hotel, they were guided by the antiquarian Angelo Dalmazzoni; Abbot noted that Piranesi's prints were 'the Best for the Antiquities and almost for Every thing, but they are too Black and unfinished'. He commissioned work from the seal engraver Alessandro Cades and the draughtsman 'Miri' [Ludovico Mirri] (coloured drawings, copies of ancient and modern masters, but dear). In Naples James Clark acted as their cicerone, and they dined at Sir William Hamilton's with Emma Hart and her mother. On their return journey, Abbot met Charles Fox and Mrs Armitstead in Venice. The tour, which took ten weeks and one day and covered 2,906 miles, cost £690.7s.6d. As Baron Colchester, Abbot made a second, more leisurely Continental tour of France, Switzerland and Italy, from July 1819 to May 1822.




On 13 October James Martin paid a visit to 'Coll Scott & Major Abercrombie', recently arrived in Rome, but was not received; on the 26th he met them dining with Edward Gibbon and William Guise (Martin jnl.MSS).


Cav.Arbernino'/'Abendin' was listed in Florence on 18 and 25 November 1769.1 On 25 December Margaret Forbes wrote that a Mr Aberdeen was among the Scotsmen in Rome.2 A 'Mr Alberdin' arrived in Venice on 22 May 1770 with a 'Mr Parnale' [Parnell].3

Extremely underbred but warmly honest' (CP), Lord Abingdon went abroad for several years after leaving Oxford. Much of his time was spent in Switzerland where he met Voltaire, who later characterised him as 'Pair d'Angleterre / Qui voyageait tout excédé d'ennui / Uniquement pour sortir de chez lui, / Lequel avait pour charmer sa tristesse / Trois chiens courants, du punch, et sa maîtresse' (La Guerre Civile de Genève). Hennin, the French resident in Geneva, described Abingdon as 'ce jeune homme très pétulant', who had been taught nothing but hunting and music.1 Lord Abingdon appears to have spent about a year in Italy, spread over the first half of 1763 and the winter and early summer of 1764-5. In February 1763 he visited Nathaniel Dance in Rome,2 and it was presumably at this time that he sat to Batoni.3 In March he had been in Naples with Thomas Vivien,4 and in September 1763 Richard Kaye met him in Geneva.5 In September 1764 Abingdon arrived in Turin from Geneva. 'His Lordship comes here it seems very much on acc't of the Opera of w'ch he is very fond', wrote John Morgan, 'as he has an excellent taste for Music & plays himself very well on some Instruments.'6 In February 1765 he was in Rome with his brother Peregrine Bertie, staying near the Piazza di Spagna at Pio Dominico Coco's inn.7 Sir William Farington met them there in April, and again in May in Florence, where Abingdon had fallen ill with 'a dangerous disorder'; on 26 May he invited Farington to dine with him at the house which had been taken for him in the country, overlooking the Vale of Arno; 'in the Evening we had Musick', Farington noted in his journal, adding that 'Mr Wisce, a German' [C. Weiss of Mulhausen, Switzerland; d. 1790] had performed delightfully on the flute.8 By the end of July 1765 Abingdon was back in Geneva. He was in London in July 1768 when he married, and he became a member of Gibbon's Roman Club.9 It appears he returned to Italy at least once; in October 1770 père Nicolas, who owned a house on Mont Cenis, boasted one room had been occupied that summer by Lord A-g-n who had retired there from Florence during the heats of the summer to amuse himself for three months in the mountains with his dogs and horses.10 He spent three summers in this Alpine retreat.11


Acland set out from London with Thomas Vivien,1 and they were reported in Florence on 5 February 1767;2 'Giovanni Steland Inglese di Tomaso' and 'Tomaso Vivien' arrived in Venice on 20 February 1767.3 In May Acland was met in Paris by his uncle.  [He could not have travelled with Thomas Townshend (who was voting in Parliament during the period Acland was abroad), with whom he is shown in Reynolds's Young Archers (Tatton Heirlooms)]
John Acton had come to Florence in 1747 to join up with James Mill and William Lowther in the Bengal Conspiracy, an ambitious plot to overrun Bengal in the name of the Emperor of Austria.1 Mill had purchased three ships in England to transport the army from Tuscany, but when the project was abandoned the ships became the Tuscan navy, commanded by Acton. While he never mastered enough Italian to feel at home in Italy, Acton alienated himself from his compatriots in Leghorn and Florence by becoming a Tuscan citizen in 1754 and by turning Catholic. In April 1755 Horace Mann reported that Acton was fitting up two men-o-war at Porto Ferraio to 'cruise against the Algerines' and he opposed Acton recruiting English sailors; he reported Acton's return to Florence on 29 May 'to make a visit to his mistress, who will find him more occupation than the Algerines'.2 Edward Gibbon, who was related, met him at Pisa in September 1764, finding him a pitiable figure after suffering a stroke the previous winter.3 Acton died at Pisa on 9 November 1766.
Although hardly a British traveller, Acton was descended from Shropshire baronets and had considerable influence in Naples. Born a French Catholic (his middle names evoking his family's Jacobite sympathies), he came to Florence in 1755 to join his uncle, John Acton, whom he succeeded as commander of the Tuscan fleet in 1766. In August 1778 the Grand Duke, at the insistence of his sister, Queen Maria Carolina of Naples, promoted Acton to General and sent him to Naples to help reorganise the Neapolitan navy. By 1780 he was also Minister of War, and a favourite with the Queen. He increased the size of the Neapolitan army and navy, founded academies and arsenals, and built military hospitals and roads. By 1790 he was Chief Minister and he worked closely with Sir William Hamilton during the French wars. In 1800 he married, with Papal dispensation, his brother Joseph's young daughter, Mary Anne; she bore him two sons and a daughter (all painted by Robert Fagan in 1809; Sotheby's, 12 Nov. 1980). Acton died in Palermo on 11 August 1811. His (unattributed) portrait as a naval commander c.1780 was engraved by Bartolozzi and his marble bust carved in Rome in 1795 by Antonio d'Este was sold in 1981 (Christie's, 8 Dec.).  His younger brother, Joseph Edward Acton (1737-1808), also served in Naples, becoming a lieutenant general in 1803.
In 1771 Adair was sent by the King with Dr Richard Jebb to attend the Duke of Gloucester, who had fallen ill during his tour of Italy.1 They arrived at Leghorn on 8 December, and reached the Duke at Pisa on the 11th. They sailed with him from Leghorn on 23 December to Naples, attending his asthma and an abcess in his side; the Duke was well enough to leave Naples for Rome on 23 February 1772. Three years later, acting on behalf of the Duke of Gloucester, Adair sent the Pope a collection of surgical instruments (later deposited in the hospital of Santo Spirito).2  In 1777 Jebb and Adair were again called urgently from England to attend the Duke at Trent, where they arrived on 15 July.3 On 14 September the Duchess of Gloucester told Horace Walpole that the doctors were about to take a five-day holiday in Venice, where Adair alone arrived on 17 September.4 Jebb and Adair then accompanied the Duke and Duchess on their return to England. The King created Jebb a Baronet, but Adair 'with equal propriety and good sense, begged leave to decline' a similar reward.5 Adair's sale (Christie's, 21 May 1790) included four lots of bronzes and marbles, and many Italian old masters 'the whole selected with great taste at a most Liberal Expence during his Residence Abroad'. Two 'fine Grecian heads on therms', bought at the sale by Richard Payne Knight, passed via Townley to the British Museum-probably the two heads of Dionysius which Adair was said to have acquired at Baiae in, or shortly after, December 1771, soon after their excavation.6
His name is variously spelt ('Guiemo Alder', 'Arder', 'Ardair', 'William Adair', 'Adari'). In April 1796 he was in Venice with 'Francesco Grinerl'[?], and in May Colonel William Bagnell and John Kelly were his companions at Padua, Vicenza and Bassano (ASV IS 777, 782, 783).
While he shared much of his older brother Robert's aesthetic discernment and possessed considerable literary gifts, he appears to have lacked the latter's original vision, energy and single-minded drive for professional advancement. Although preparing the way for Robert's return from his own grand tour in January 1758 and establishing their London base before leaving for the Continent in May 1760, James's more important contributions in their formidable collaboration were to come later. Characteristic of his attitude in the surviving correspondence from Italy is his observation that he was the only British artist who 'kept his own coach and assumes the title of Cavaliere'.1 Robert had first requested James to join him in Rome during the autumn of 1755, but the latter set out from Harwich, well after his brother's return. He travelled as a Jacobite officer (a disguise arranged by Robert's friend, General William Graeme) and was accompanied by George Richardson, a draughtsman from the family firm in Edinburgh. In Venice, where he arrived in June 1760, apart from recording further monuments for Robert, he was to direct the completion of the plates for his brother's ambitious folio The Ruins of the Emperor Diocletian's Palace at Spalatro. For this he hired a fourth engraver, Domenico Cunego, to assist Bartolozzi, Santini and Zucchi. Meanwhile he learnt Italian, practised drawing under Clérisseau, made contacts with English residents and tourists, and bought paintings (especially by Zuccarelli). Brief visits were made to Padua (where he predictably impressed Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, as Robert before him) and Pola. When visiting Vicenza in October, he found a young draughtsman, Giuseppe Sacco, whom he sent ahead with Richardson to Florence. Adam and Clérisseau proceeded to Bologna, where, like Robert again, they met Count Algarotti and where, according to James, he was elected to the Accademia Clementina (though no record appears to survive).2 They eventually reached Florence, via Ferrara, on 23 November, and stayed with Ignazio Hugford who acted as their guide. Here Adam enlisted another young draughtsman, Agostino Scara, whom he intended to take to Rome and train for Robert's office. They visited Pisa and Leghorn where James's first attempt to organise an expedition to Sicily and the Levant met with failure. They arrived in Rome on 24 February 1761, staying in the Casa Guarnieri, close to the top of the Spanish Steps (where Robert had previously lived in some style), joined by Zucchi and Cunego from Venice. Although the Abbé Grant relayed James's social conquests to Robert, Clérisseau reported a worrying lack of application. By the summer Adam was supervising the drawing of monuments and studying antique remains. Unlike Robert in this situation, however, he appears to have made little use of Piranesi's unique knowledge or perceptions, only contacting him to urge on the publication of the impressive folio, Il Campo Marzio dell'Antica Roma, dedicated to his brother.3 In late August 1761 he departed for Naples with Richardson to renegotiate the Eastern trip. There he met Thomas Pitt, the 3rd Duke of Roxburghe and Sir Francis Eyles-Styles, with whom he visited Vanvitelli's palace at Caserta, then nearing completion. Towards the end of September Clérisseau and Zucchi had arrived from Rome, and in the absence of passports for the Levant expedition, they went to Benevento to record the Arch of Trajan. They also made studies of Pompeii (where the excavations were beginning to draw attention away from Herculaneum), the gaunt temples at Paestum ('They are of an early, an inelegant and unenriched Doric, that afford no detail,' he wrote, 'and scarcely produce two good views') and Capri, all of which James intended to form part of an impressive volume, Antiquities of Sicily and Graecia Major. Eventually, the continuing delay over passports caused him to postpone the projected voyage to Sicily and the Levant and he returned to Rome in mid-December. One of the more productive sides to his tour was Adam's art dealing activities. Assisted by the Abbé Grant's contacts, he proceded to acquire paintings and sculpture. By July 1762, he had acquired some 500 pictures 'besides drawings, antiquities, modellos, gessos &ca valued at £1,500 more'. Undoubtedly his greatest coup (although Robert is likely to have prepared the way) was to arrange the purchase of Cardinal Albani's unrivalled collection of old master drawings for George III.4 Despite considerable reluctance on the owner's side, the pressing need for money to provide a dowry for the daughter of the Cardinal's liaison with Countess Cheroffini (whose literary salon James regularly attended), clinched the deal and the collection was dispatched to Leghorn in July 1762. In May 1764 James Martin saw in Rome 'a Collection of Statues, Busts, aca. belonging to one Mr Adams', conceivably Robert and/or James Adam.5  After some pressure, Piranesi had finally produced the long-awaited folio on the Campus Martius, eulogising Robert as 'Architectus Celeberrimus' on the title page, and on 21 May James reported to his brother the dispatch of some £120 worth of the plates for promotional sale in England. Meanwhile, in the same month their younger brother, William, had sent a ship for the proposed Levant journey but, as this was seized by the Spanish navy and taken to Algeciras, James (with very little reluctance) abandoned the project altogether. Increasingly aware that his three Italian years had few practical results to show in comparison with Robert's tour, James now threw his energies into finalizing designs for a projected rebuilding of the British Parliament, begun in a desultory manner some eighteen months before. The gratifying response from Sir James Gray and Sir Francis Eyles-Styles after a private exhibition of the finished drawings (probably by Clérisseau, Zucchi and others), at the Casa Guarnieri on 22 October, prompted James to show 'a capital of [his] own invention', incorporating lions, unicorns, roses and thistles, to Natoire, Director of the French Academy. While the latter affected to be impressed (Natoire said he 'would have taken it for antique'), Piranesi was to refer more enthusiastically to it a few years later in his Parere su l'Architettura (1765) as illustrating his novel theories of eclectic composition, and a wax model of it features prominently in an unattributed portrait of James executed in 1763 (priv. coll.; formerly attrib. to Batoni).  After the Peace of Paris was signed in November 1762, James successfully obtained family permission to remain in Rome a further six months (although little record survives of his activities); he was probably the 'Monzu Adan' who with a 'Monzu Giorgio' was living in the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1763.6 He finally left for England in May 1763. Since Cunego and Zucchi had declined to go to London, James hired three draughtsmen for the London office before his departure, leaving Clérisseau to act as his agent (later to be replaced by the Abbé Grant). Reviewing his scant achievements in Italy with becoming candour, James was subsequently to observe that 'I believe that biographers will chose to pass over this part of my life in profound silence'.

Following some eight years of architectural practice in the family firm before and after his father's death, in 1748, and ambitious to improve his professional education, Adam accepted an invitation by their client, the 2nd Earl of Hopetoun, to accompany the latter's younger brother, Charles Hope-Weir, to Italy. Aware of the need to circumvent social barriers as an architect and to benefit from the highest social contacts, Robert adopted the role of a 'Gentilhomme Anglois' from one of the 'ancientist families in Scotland' (as privately expressed in the surviving, extensive correspondence with his family throughout the tour).1 Moreover, the lucrative family business provided Robert with a capital of some £5000 to support this venture handsomely. They arrived in Genoa early in January 1755 and through Hope's influence were soon at the opera, seated in the Balbi's box. 'The burghers don't imagine we are anything but first rate who dare presume on such familiarities with the Balbis', he wrote, even going so far as to dismiss the British consul, John Birtles, as being 'a rank below us'. Having enjoyed the social life in Leghorn and Pisa, they reached Florence on 30 January for the last two weeks of the Carnival. There, however, Adam began making his first serious professional contacts. Apart from meeting the collector and scholar Baron Stosch, he acquired valuable contacts through the painter and marchand amateur, Ignazio Hugford; although finding the latter's paintings too costly, he claimed to have 'been the more extravagant in drawings of which I have made a noble purchase to the satisfaction of all conoisseurs here'. The sculptor Joseph Wilton-'an excellent artist and an obliging companion'-guided him round the galleries and monuments. More importantly, it was the architect Charles-Louis Clérisseau (then en route for France after expulsion from a three-year training at the French Academy, Rome, and then staying with Hugford) who, Adam writes, 'created fire and emulation in my breast'. Recognising the considerable advantages of Clérisseau's avant-garde knowledge and Roman contacts, Robert retained him on a financial basis as a teacher and companion for the rest of the tour: a crucial collaboration which lasted into the 1770s.2 After their arrival in Rome, Adam's relationship with Hope-Weir began to cool, especially after Robert successfully took over Sir Charles Hotham's rooms in the Casa Guarnieri, above the Spanish Steps and one of the best addresses in the English quarter, where the Duke of Bridgewater and his 'bear leader' Robert Wood were then staying. While by then the Abbé Grant was arranging Adam's social life, which included the circle of the artist Allan Ramsay, Robert had resolved to commence serious study. He was already aware of the formidable challenge of William Chambers, then ending five years of travel in Italy and 'a prodigy for Genius, for sense & good taste'. Adam, having found English travellers 'much prepossessed' in favour of this rival, recognised the need to acquire 'a taste superior to what I ever thought of before I saw Rome and of which at this moment I am quite ignorant'. He declined to accompany Hope-Weir to Naples, but, changing his mind, went separately with Clérisseau and the Abbés Grant and Stonor. On their arrival in early April they explored Baiae, Cumae, Solfatara, the Grotto of Posillipo and the new palace at Caserta. At Herculaneum, the museum at Portici, where Ramsay's friend Camillo Paderni was curator, particularly interested Adam, and Clérisseau made many sketches there. However, due to the uncomfortable heat, they left on 20 April for Rome which, Adam states, 'pleases me more than this place'. Back in the Casa Guarnieri, where Adam deliberately kept his distance from fellow practitioners, he hired an elegant coach and considered himself 'like the King of Artists'. A strict daily régime of instruction was now instituted, studying figures, ornament and perspective with Clérisseau, and two other French artists, Jean-Baptiste Lallemand and Laurent Pêcheux.3 Meanwhile his social life was carefully directed towards making influential contacts and his greatest coup, in May 1755, was to meet Cardinal Albani ('son eminence and me are grit as dogs' heads') while he regularly attended the conversazioni of Albani's mistress, the Countess Cheroffini at her palace in the Piazza Pilotta. Above all, the crucial encounters which were to change radically Adam's entire approach to imaginative composition in design took place with Piranesi from the following June onwards.4 While the latter was 'of such disposition as bars all instruction, his ideas in locution so ill arranged, his expression so furious and fantastic', Robert was swift to recognise the Venetian's stimulus in that 'so amazing and ingenious fancies as he has produced in the different plans of the Temples, Baths and Palaces and other buildings I never saw ... are the greatest fund for inspiring and instilling invention in any lover of architecture that can be imagined'. From then onwards they were in regular contact, and over the summer went on sketching expeditions to sites such as the Baths of Caracalla and the Villa Adriana. Adam also considered producing a revised edition of Desgodetz's Edifices Antiques de Rome, partly for self-advertisement and to improve his technical understanding of classical design and vocabulary. Such matters were discussed with Ramsay and Wood who, with the Abbé Grant, came to form what Adam called 'my Caledonian Club'. When Hope-Weir finally left Rome on 3 September 1755, Adam shortly set out, in a smart new carriage, on a six-week tour to the Adriatic coast; he recorded the Temple of Clitumnus near Spoleto, as measured by Palladio, and went as far as Rimini and Ravenna. They returned to Rome by 12 October 'with a Portfolio with Triumphal Arches, Ancient Bridges and other views of whatever appeared curious and worth drawing'. As work intensified, Robert requested (in vain) for his brother James to come out to help in the survey of antiquities necessary to produce the new Desgodetz. Further frustration was occasioned by the presence of the two energetic Mylne brothers, who had arrived in January 1755 to study architecture, offering yet more potential competition. 'Shoals of English' poured into Rome every day in December, wrote Adam critically, 'great Lords, great Fools and sensible Gentlemen', of whom Robert particularly cultivated the 10th Earl of Huntingdon and Sir William Stanhope. During the winter of 1755 and into the following year, despite the welcome distractions of the Carnival, Clérisseau continued with his tuition in composition and Adam's designs also reflected the impact of the Desgodetz project. By March 1756 work on the latter required more draughtsmen and he recruited Agostino Brunias and Laurent-Benoit Dewez, while by July a copy of Burlington's Fabbriche Antiche was required from London to check Palladio's drawings on the site. Meanwhile, daily sketching expeditions with Clérisseau, which often included Ramsay, carried on through the spring and summer in the Forum and Palatine and further afield at Hadrian's Villa (where Piranesi was then carrying out an extensive survey). Detailed records were also made of Renaissance buildings, such as Palazzo Mattei, Palazzo Farnese, Villa Madama and Villa di Papa Giulio, with special attention to their rich ornamentation. In April 1756, Adam's confidence was considerably boosted by the publication of Piranesi's magisterial Le Antichita Romane, incorporating a particularly flattering reference ('Roberto Adam Britann. Architecto Celeberimm.') in the frontispiece of Volume II ('representing the Appian Way in all its ancient splendour, with all the mausoleums of the Consuls, emperors &ca., he [Piranesi] has taken the occasion to put in Ramsay's name and mine with all our Elogiums, as if buried in these tombs').  Following the disastrous earthquake which had destroyed almost the whole of Lisbon in the previous December, Adam became obsessed with the design for a grandiose new city. In search of new experiences in June he set off south with Clérisseau to Sora, 'the country of the Samnites and Volsci' but found little of architectural consequence. With his thirtieth birthday on 3 July, he became 'vastly melancholy' and plunged into further work with the team of draughtsmen. However, by September he was forced to renounce the Desgodetz project since it was retarding 'more material studies' and resolved to concentrate on the more important secular buildings, primarily the major thermae. Already by November Diocletian's Baths were 'almost finished' and Caracalla's 'advancing apace', to his satisfaction much improving on the work of Palladio and Burlington before him. Looking back on this work a few months later, he considered these thermae 'amongst the most extensive and noble buildings of the ancients. By them these emperors have shown mankind that true Grandeur was only to be produced from simplicity and largeness of parts and that conveniency was not inconsistent with decoration'. At the beginning of October 1756 he spent a late villeggiatura for a few days in Albano with the Abbés Grant and Stonor, followed by a brief visit to Frascati. Then, on return to Rome, he bought a new suit and awaited the winter influx of milordi. Among the latter he met Lords Elgin and Rosebery, as well as Miss Diana Molyneux who was led to question how the 'gay, cheerful and frolicsome' man she had met in her house could also be the 'studious, laborious and enterprising' Mr Adam in the Casa Guarnieri. Predictably, his studies again began to suffer as such society beckoned; he took a box at the opera for the season. By January 1757, with the prospect of his departure coming ever closer, this enforced double life resulted in a fever, during which he was attended by the Pretender's physician, Dr James Murray, and his colleagues, Drs Grierson and Irwin (the latter opining that 'a guid glass of claret will cure ye quite. God damme, Sir but Byng would gae a thousand mile a foot to be as weal as ye are!').  On recovery in the spring of 1757, Adam now began preparing his return journey. An entire room in Casa Guarnieri was filled with his large collection of fragments, vases, marbles and old masters (the latter for profitable sale in London). While these were to return by sea, there were also great quantities of drawings which, wisely, he intended to take himself. He dined with Gavin Hamilton and, on visiting Piranesi's establishment nearby at Palazzo Tomati, was delighted to find his friend busy etching a large visionary map of the Campus Martius with a fulsome dedication to himself as 'the Patron of Architecture', along with other flattering tributes. (He was successful in persuading Piranesi to incorporate this into an ambitious folio, also dedicated to him, which was issued in 1762; see James Adam). With great reluctance, he eventually left Rome at the beginning of May, accompanied by Clérisseau, Dewez and Brunias and followed by the Ramsays. Adam's progress north was something of a social triumph. Unlike his initial visit to Florence, Horace Mann received him with marked attention, as did Count Algarotti, the celebrated virtuoso, in Bologna. He was equally welcomed in Padua by John Murray and consul Joseph Smith. His reputation, meanwhile, had been confirmed by election to three Italian academies: the Accademia Clementina, Bologna (14 April 1757); the Accademia del Disegno, Florence (30 April 1757); and the Accademia di S.Luca, Rome (8 May 1757). From Padua Adam and Clérisseau travelled slowly by burchiello along the Brenta, visiting Palladian villas, before reaching Venice on 6 July. Among those he met, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu considered him 'a man of genius'. Since diminishing finances and lack of time prohibited an expedition to Greece and the eastern Mediterranean, he set out to make his last important study, of Diocletian's Palace in Spalato (then spelt 'Spalatro'). The Dalmatian town was garrisoned by Venetian troops and, as luck would have it, his friend, General William Graeme of Bucklyvie was then Commander in Chief. After gaining special permission for the visit through consul Joseph Smith (visited at his Mogliano villa), Adam, accompanied by Clérisseau, Dewez, Brunias, and his servant Donald, sailed from Venice on 11 July and reached Pola six days later. Having learned that Stuart and Revett had already planned to survey the amphitheatre there, they sailed on to Spalato, arriving on 22 July. There they drew and partly excavated the ruined palace which was largely encased by the medieval town, work being hampered by suspicions that Adam was a spy. After having four people 'constantly at work' over a period of five weeks, he left on 28 August and eventually reached Venice on 11 September. Later that month he visited Vicenza to study the works of Palladio, 'his adored master', although at Verona he told the antiquarian Torelli he judged Sanmichele to be the better designer. His final departure from Italy was delayed by rumours of British hostilities, but having negotiated with Count Rosenberg, the Austrian minister in Venice, he successfully obtained passes and set out on 12 October, reaching Augsburg across the Alps a month later. Meanwhile Clérisseau was left behind at Vicenza with a retaining fee of £100 per annum, both to distance him from rivalling Robert in England and ostensibly to supervise the engraving of the Spalato plates in Venice until James Adam arrived on his own tour.


Lady Mary Adams' was listed in Venice at the end of 1794 with a Mrs Bailey ['Bejley'], and in June 1795 she was listed in Padua and Venice with Charles Sackville (ASV IS 772, 774).


Addison travelled with the aim of preparing himself for government service. He received a grant of £200 from the government and acted as bearleader to George Dashwood ('un bon gros et gras bourgeois') and Edward Wortley Montagu (1678-1761), though it is not clear how frequently they were with him. Before entering Italy Addison refreshed his memory 'among the Classic Authors', so that he might 'compare the Natural Face of the Country with the Landskips that the Poets have given us of it'. On 12 December 1700 he sailed from Marseilles for Genoa.1 From Genoa he travelled via Pavia to Milan, where he visited the Duomo, the Ambrosiana and the Villa Simonetta. On 9 January 1701 he was in Padua with Dashwood and Montagu,2 admiring the church of S.Giustina (which he attributed to Palladio) as 'the most handsome, luminous, disencumbered building in the Inside that I have ever seen'. He was in Venice for the Carnival, but he bitterly attacked the decadence of the Venetian Republic. He proceeded down the Adriatic coast through Ferrara to Ravenna (where he noticed what is now known as the mausoleum of Theodoric), Rimini and the Republic of San Marino-'a Savage mountain cover'd with People', which he contrasted with the almost deserted Campagna of Rome. At Loreto he visited the Holy House, and was amazed to see such riches amid 'so much Poverty and Misery'. He paused at Rome only to visit St Peter's and the Pantheon, leaving the rest until his return from Naples, where he passed Holy Week. The desolation he saw there he attributed to 'the very genius of the Roman Catholic religion'; he twice witnessed the 'pretended miracle' of the blood of St Januarius which he thought to be the continuation of a heathen practice. He saw the tomb of Sannazaro at Posillipo, and he visited Capri before following Aeneas's route by sea back to Rome.  'I am in the pleasantest City I have yet seen', he wrote from Rome on 2 July 1701; 'There are more statues in it than there are men in several others'. His cicerone was Ficoroni, from whom he also received lessons in numismatology; Ficoroni later told Spence that Addison 'did not go any depth in the study of medals' and received 'not more than twenty lessons'-yet Addison subsequently felt confident enough to publish his Dialogues upon the Usefulness of Ancient Medals.3 Dashwood was with him in Rome some of the time and Montagu rejoined him briefly, but had left by 7 August when Addison was writing to him that 'I am forc'd for want of better company to converse mostly with pictures, statues and Medals'. Antiquity was always his interest, and modern art he found 'far from being in a flourishing condition'. He left Rome in October and made his way via Siena, Pisa and Lucca to Florence. He thought that Siena cathedral, however barbarous, was a building which 'a Man may view with Pleasure after he has seen St Peter's'. At Florence, Addison, Dashwood and Sir Thomas Dereham met the Duke of Shrewsbury, and the small group, sometimes also including [Richard?] Shuttleworth, visited several sites together, including the Riccardi palace and the Library of Manuscripts.4 Addison continued his journey northwards through Bologna, where he admired Raphael's S.Cecilia, and Parma, where he particularly noticed Aleotti's Teatro Farnese. After passing through Modena and Turin (hastily, because of the Spanish wars), he crossed Mont Cenis and was in Geneva on 9 December 1701. There he heard of the death of William III, which brought the power of his political friends to an end. He remained abroad in Switzerland, Germany and Holland until 1704. 'There is certainly no Place in the World where a Man may Travel with greater Pleasure and Advantage than in Italy,' he wrote in the preface to his Remarks on several parts of Italy &c. in the years 1701, 1702, 1703 [1705]. His book was very widely used and read, even though Henry Fielding classed Addison 'as a commentator on the classics, rather than as a writer of travels',5 and Horace Walpole remarked that Addison had 'travelled through the poets, and not through Italy; for all his ideas are borrowed from the descriptions, and not from reality'.6
A 'Mr Ady' of the British factory at Leghorn was recorded in April 1766.1 In October and December 1771 Adey and Joseph Porter were acting as bankers in Leghorn.2 On 23 January 1773 it was announced that William Adey and George Blay had received the Grand Duke's permission to make and dye cotton and linen at Pisa.3 An undated monument in Leghorn cemetery to 'William Aedy merchant' was erected by his sister Mary Adey.4

Agar was in Rome early in 1783; on 10 May Thomas Jenkins told John Strange that Agar was 'the only Dilettanti amongst our Gentlemen travellers this year', and that he had 'sought for bargains, Anders[on] sends me word that he has sold him two of your pictures amounting to sixty five crowns'.1 In 1786 Agar recalled with regret 'some years ago' having passed over the offer of the Boccapaduli Poussin Sacraments for £1500, since Gavin Hamilton was critical of their condition.2  He may have returned to Italy in 1787. According to Thomas Watkins, a 'Lord Clifden' spent the winter of 1787-8 in Italy,3 and 'Agar of Christ Church' was in Bologna at the end of May 1788.4

In 1767 Aikman wrote that he had lived half a year at Rome in 1747,1 the year his uncle, also John Aikman, retired from his merchant business at Leghorn; he discussed the possibility of Anne Forbes going to Rome to study painting, which Aikman and his brother William eventually helped to fund. He described the Abbé Grant as his 'worthy old acquaintance',2 and Aikman was also the friend of Gavin Hamilton (though not, apparently, in Italy).3
The family firm of Aikman, merchants of Leghorn, were one of the fifteen houses in the trading colony which then provided banking and transport facilities.1 In 1724 Messrs Winder and Aikman are mentioned in Leghorn;2 in March 1743 Aikman's business partner was Marishall, whose name was replaced by that of William Aikman (his nephew) in May 1744.3 There is an undated portrait of him by an Italian hand in which he holds a letter addressed to him 'Merchant - At Leghorn' (priv. coll.). With the consul Burrington Goldsworthy, Francis Harriman and Henry Ragueneau he was deputed in 1746 to oversee 'the Work' [the establishment] of the British Protestant cemetery at Leghorn, their names remaining inscribed on the cemetery wall. In 1748 he gave the young Scottish painter Samuel Provan an introduction to Agostino Masucci in Rome.4 He had retired in 1747, when his nephew William took over the firm, and died five years later in Leghorn. His tomb, erected by his nephew, commemorated his thirty-eight years as a merchant in the city.5
Aikman sold his family estate in order to travel. He had first intended to go with the 4th Earl of Manchester in 1706/7, but was prevented by the lateness of the sale of his property, or by his marriage.1 He left London in the summer of 1707, travelling as a gentleman with a servant. He apparently stopped in Florence, where he may have painted the self-portrait for the Grand Duke (Uffizi), before going on to Rome, where he copied works by Carlo Maratti (copies of four mythological subjects by Maratti, possibly by Aikman, are at Penicuik).  After a visit to the eastern Mediterranean, he returned to Florence, where he painted a portrait of Henry Newton, the British envoy, dated 12 April 1710 (priv. coll, Florence). It was later recalled how Aikman 'after he had been in Greece and returned to the Florentine Gallery, told [Sebastiano] Bianchi [the custodian] that the Venus of Medici had the true Grecian face'.2 Aikman was back in Rome by the summer of 1710, where he met John Talman, with whom (and probably William Kent) he travelled to Naples later that year. Aikman presumably also visited Leghorn where his uncle, John Aikman, was then well-established. His return to Scotland may have been occasioned by the death in October 1710 of the painter John Medina, whom he hoped to succeed as principal Scottish portraitist. Near the end of his life, in the summer of 1730, Aikman considered going to Naples for his health, but the death of his son early the following year was soon followed by his own.
The last member of the family firm of merchants at Leghorn, he had arrived by May 1744, see John Aikman. In July 1744 Alexander Drummond 'received civilities' from William and his uncle.1 William took over from his uncle in 1747, and he saw to the erection of his uncle's tomb in 1752. He sat to Cosmo Alexander at Leghorn in 1751 (priv. coll.). Matthew Brettingham and Robert Adam were among those whom Aikman assisted in Italy,2 and in 1767 William and his brother, John Aikman of the Ross, advised and helped sponsor the studies of their young relative, Anne Forbes, in Rome, see Forbes. The Aikmans continued in Leghorn until 1770.3

Aldrich and Neal, 'friends of Mr Harts' [Walter Harte, see Philip Stanhope], were joined in Rome in November 1750 by Edward Thomas 'to view ye Paintings of ye Palaces'; Thomas considered they then had 'ye best judge of paintings in Rome as their antiquary'.1 He was probably the Aldridge whom Richard Wilson saw in Venice in July 1751.2
Aldworth, 'said to be one of the merriest devils in the world',1 was one of The Bloods (or Common Room Set) who gathered in Geneva in the early 1740s.2 He appears to have been in Rome sometime in 1740-1 with William Windham and others of the Bloods.3 On 11 October 1744 he set out for Italy from Geneva with Sir Thomas Sebright, Horatio Walpole and Dr George Turnbull,4 visiting Milan and Florence.5 He had returned to England by the end of 1745.6

Named Cosmo after Cosimo III, Grand Duke of Tuscany, Alexander left Scotland after taking part in the Jacobite rebellion of 1745. He went first to London and then to Rome, where he had arrived by Easter 1747 when he was living in the Strada Felice with two other Scots, the elderly Jesuit priest Patrick Leith and George Gray, a Scot of his own age.1 In July 1747 he delivered a letter of recommendation as 'a lad of genius in painting' from Patrick Dawson to his cousin, James Edgar, secretary to the exiled Stuart court.2 That same year he was commissioned by the Pretender to paint the portrait of his son, Charles Edward Stuart (who was not then in Rome, and it is likely that Alexander made a version of an original portrait by Domenico Dupra). Further commissions came from the Pretender's family, the dates on the completed works (priv. colls.) covering his time in Rome and his subsequent stay in Paris. Alexander also met the painter George Chalmers, his future brother-in-law, and painted other exiled Jacobites, including the Earl of Winton in 1749. In February 1750 Isabella Lumisden wrote from Edinburgh to her brother Andrew, under-secretary to the Pretender in Rome, sending her compliments to 'Alexander'.3 Alexander received commissions from other Scots: for Alexander Hay he copied Caravaggio's Woman teaching a girl to sew, and for Peter Coutts the Dying Gladiator (in grisaille) and Carracci's Susanna. In 1751 James Edgar helped him obtain a commission from the 9th Earl Marischal, to purchase prints and drawings and to complete a painting of The Battle of Bannockburn, originally ordered from Placido Costanzi. A Charity (sold Christie's, 22 Sep. 1975) was acquired by Lord Deskford.4 Alexander left Rome in 1751, making long visits to Leghorn, where he painted William Aikman (priv. coll.), Bologna, Venice, and Dresden.

James Alexander had returned to Ireland from India with a sizeable fortune in 1772.1 He purchased an estate in Co.Tyrone and following his marriage in 1774 set out with his wife for Italy. In Rome Mrs Alexander sat to Batoni for a portrait dated 1777 (Clark/Bowron 401; priv. coll.). A Mr Alexander with a Mr Saunders was seeking an introduction to the King at Naples in January 17772 and Mr and Mrs Alexander, again with a Mr Saunders, had arrived in Venice on 5 May 1777.3 They had returned to Ireland by 21 December, when Mrs Alexander died in Dublin giving birth to their son.
His self-portrait miniature (SNPG) is inscribed in Italian: 'John Alexander, a Scotch Painter of Paris, his portrait painted by himself on his arrival (by sea from London) at Leghorn, 1711, when he was 25 years of age and on his way to pursue his studies at Florence and Rome.' He carried letters from the Jacobite Marquess of Huntly (later 2nd Duke of Gordon) to Cosimo III, Grand Duke of Tuscany.1 Alexander was in Florence in 1712 and was certainly in Rome between February and June 1714, when he painted a portrait of Thomas Coke, who also paid him for drawings and prints on 31 August 1716 and in April 1717.2 There are Italian views by him dated 1715 (BMPL and SNG), and seven views in the Thomas Ashby collection in the Vatican, dated 1716 and 1717, are attributed to him.3 A life drawing (priv. coll.) indicates he attended the French Academy,4 and he appears to have worked with the Italian painter Giuseppe Chiari, who gave him a drawing in 1719 when he left Rome (The Judgment of Solomon; coll. Santarelli, Uffizi). In 1717/18 he published six engravings, dedicated to Cosimo III, from the designs of Raphael in the Vatican.  On 11 June 1718 he was working as a copyist and agent for the Earl of Mar (then with the Jacobite court at Urbino);5 he criticised the Earl's miniature portrait by Ramelli and advised on his commissions.6 On 22 June he told Mar of two small ovals he was going to send, a Perseus and Andromeda and a Perseus and Medusa, both stories which he found 'applicable to your Grace in the last conjunctive you had in Scotland'. He had forwarded a copy of Raphael's Parnassus, to be sent to the Pretender, explaining that on his allowance he could not afford fine ultramarine.7 On 2 July 1718 he apologized for the quality of the small ovals he had sent: 'I find I have not the patience I was wont to have in little ... I hope to succeed in the life of Mary Stuart, that great queen, for, if my performance could equal my love and esteem for her glorious memory, I am confident I should equal Raphael and Titian'.8 In August he met Andrew Hay,9 and he was helping the Marquess of Annandale in his dealings with the sculptor Agostino Cornacchini. Hay and Alexander may have advised Annandale on his purchases, as they were called in to evaluate them after his death in 1721.10 He returned to Scotland in 1719, bringing a marble bust of Cosimo III by Foggini (VAM) for Gordon Castle. Like his son, Alexander took part in the 1745 Jacobite rebellion, and may have returned to Rome,11 although proposals for a new edition of his prints after Raphael were issued in London on 1 March 1765.12


Allan spent ten years in Italy where he found constant occupation as a painter of portraits and histories and made many drawings of Italian life and scenery. His sponsors were Lord Cathcart, Lady Frances and Lady Charlotte Erskine, and Mrs Abercrombie of Tullibody. There is no evidence that he was in Italy before the summer of 1767,1 when he described to Lord Cathcart how his vessel had been boarded on 11 July in the Mediterranean by a Turkish officer, whom he had painted in Genoa whilst undergoing quarantine; he had proceeded to Leghorn and was setting out for Rome immediately, where Andrew Lumisden was expecting him.2  By the following March he was well-established in Rome and had already visited Naples, the envoy William Hamilton calling him 'Lady Cathcart's little painter Allan', 'one of the greatest geniuses I ever met with; he is indefatigable'.3 'Monsu de Alan pittore' resided at Rome in the Palazzo Nazzari on the Strada Felice in 1768 and 1769 with James Nevay;4 at some stage he certainly had rooms in the Strada della Croce (which James Northcote took over in 1777), and he was probably the 'Mr Alan Pitt.e' staying near the Piazza di Spagna in 1773.5 He may have returned to Scotland in the summers of 1768, 1770, 1773 and 1774, when he dated portraits of Scots not known to have visited Italy, but there are signed and dated Italian portraits of Thomas Graham (1769; YCBA), Sir William and Lady Hamilton (priv. coll.), and a Self-portrait from 1770, a sketchbook inscribed 'Naples 1770' (NGS) and two large sketches, Evening Amusements at Rome and Evening Amusements at Naples, dated 1769 and 1770 respectively (Glasgow AG).  In November 1770 Allan was commissioned by Father Thorpe to paint 'the old prelate Monsignor Giacomelli' for the 8th Baron Arundell of Wardour. Thorpe described Allan as 'excellent in taking a likeness and giving the true character of the person', although he complained of his high prices; Giacomelli's portrait had to be retouched, and Thorpe sent a copy (by one Vincenzo) to Arundell as an improvement on Allan's original (which went to the sitter) and concluded that 'Allan's merit does not seem to be in the size of life, but in the composition of much lesser pieces'.6 Allan was sending portraits and history paintings to some of his patrons,7 perhaps the most notable being his state portrait of Sir William Hamilton (NPG) painted in 1775 for presentation to the British Museum, 'a small testimony', he explained, 'of my respectful regard'.8 In Rome he was helped by Gavin Hamilton (as he acknowledged in 1788),9 and he may have attended the studio of Domenico Corvi, who painted his portrait in 1774 (SNPG). In 1773 at the Accademia di S.Luca his Departure of Hector won the Concorso Balestra, a competition never previously won by a British artist (Allan's gold medal now belongs to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland and his painting remains with the Accademia). In 1773 he drew Cardinal York at Prayer in St Peter's (SNG) and in 1775 James Byres acquired one of his best pieces, the Origin of Painting (SNG).  Apart from portraiture and history painting, Allan also made topographical drawings, undertook copies (such as those of Guido Reni's Aurora and the Aldobrandini marriage for Patrick Home in 1775, see Home), and studied antique figure painting (an album with tracings and free-hand drawings, titled Memorandums & Scetches of the Antient Pictures of Herculanium, is in the SNG). He had always sketched the social scene, observing costume and ritual in Rome, Naples and elsewhere (his Roman Carnival drawings are in the Royal Collection); inscribed sketches and three sketchbooks (SNG, Aberdeen AG, and priv. coll.) record travels outside Rome, to Naples, the islands of Ischia and Procida, Tivoli, Viterbo, Florence, and Venice. He was in Parma in November 1776,10 and visited Pistoia, Cremona, Bologna and Turin, probably on his way home. Allan arrived back in England in 1777, remaining in London until the spring of 1779 when he returned to Scotland.

Edmund Allen was first in Turin for some months towards the end of 1727. On 10 January 1728 he was in Rome waiting for the roads to become passable to return to Turin to act as British chargé d'affaires.1 In 1728 he was commissioned by the Duke of Newcastle to prepare an index of the manuscripts in Turin which had belonged to the renaissance architect Pirro Ligorio.2 On 16 July 1729 Allen was appointed secretary to the Court of Savoy-Sardinia, the minor diplomatic status reflecting the coolness then prevailing in Anglo-Savoyard relations.3 But in September Allen noted 'a good many English Gentlemen at Milan in order to take the diversion of the Opera',4 and when he assisted Lady Lechmere and her husband Thomas Robinson in Turin in October, she described him as 'Minister in Turin in the absence of Mr [John] Hedges'.5 Although recalled in August 1734, Allen stayed in Turin for several more years, and he may have been the 'Mr Allen of Messina' whom Joseph Spence met there c.1740 and in Rome in 1741 (but see Edward Allen).6
From 1726 to 1748 Edward Allen was British consul at Naples, where he also acted as a banker.1 He may have been the Mr Allen previously in Naples who, on 30 September 1721, witnessed the signing of office on the death of Captain Howard.2 In 1737 he married Catherine, eldest daughter of Sir John Shadwell, then resident in Naples, who had supported Allen's request to the Duke of Newcastle for preferment: 'many months ago, before there were any thoughts of his being my son-in-law'.3 In November 1740 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu noted that Mrs Allen 'is very well behaved, and (entre nous) her lover one of the prettiest men I ever saw in any country; but all is managed with the strictest decency'.4 In June 1745, during the Austrian wars, the King of Naples, offended by the British taking Neapolitan ships believed to be supplying Spanish forces, threatened to hold Mr and Mrs Allen hostage, but Horace Mann protected them.5 In July 1746 Allen sought leave to return briefly to England to settle his five-year-old daughter and wife (who had been ill since the death of their only son, William, the previous year6). He repeated this request in February 1747, this time in order to settle his wife's inheritance on the death of her father.7 His relative James Porten had died, owing Allen a great deal of money, and Allen asked on 16 June 1747 if his 'extraordinaries' [outstanding dues] to the amount of £2000 might be paid.8 On 1 May 1748 Edward and Catherine Allen left Naples, returning to England via Florence, where Mann expected them.9 See William Allen.


Partly for business reasons and partly 'to take a ramble', John Allen sailed from Philadelphia to Leghorn with a cargo of sugars (made scarce in Italy by the Seven Years War). He was accompanied by his cousin Colonel Joseph Shippen and the painter Benjamin West.1 Shippen, seven years older, was charged with supervising Allen, and their travels were largely paid for by Allen's father. On 27 June 1760 they landed at Leghorn, where they were received by the merchants Robert Rutherfurd and George Jackson. Allen and Shippen attended to their mercantile affairs before setting off for Venice, where they met the British resident, John Murray; Dr John Morgan later found that Murray had formed a great opinion of Philadelphia 'from the acc't which Mr Shippen & Mr Allen as well as Mr West have given them of it'.2 Allen and Shippen were in Rome on 28 August and on 3 September Shippen told Rutherfurd they proposed to stay there for about a month. Allen gave West money in Italy on behalf of his father, and it was probably in the autumn of 1760 at Leghorn that West painted Allen's portrait (priv. coll.). While Shippen returned directly to America, Allen went on to England; he was probably in London in March 1761 and his father was writing to him in England in August. After a long stay in Bristol, he was back in Philadelphia by October 1762, 'a good deal improved', according to his father.

William Allen took over his brother Edward's business and consular duties in Naples in July 1748.1 In 1751-2 Pancrazi dedicated a plate in his Antichità Siciliane to 'Guglielmo Allen Console di S.M.Brittanica in Napoli'. The business failed early in 1753: 'an unlucky accident happened to poor Mr Allen's house (the Consul); it failed and all his goods and things were going to be seized, but, as the King's arms was upon the door, this was prevented'.2 In August 1753 William was replaced as consul by Isaac Jamineau, but he delayed his departure until he heard his successor was en route from England, leaving his papers in the care of the merchant William Hamilton.3 In 1764 William Allen was consul at Messina.4


Allgood arrived in Italy early in 1738 with Thomas Forster (a Jacobite friend of his father), whom he had met in France.1 In February 1738 he met George Sinclair of Ulbster in Rome.2 His name, with those of Charles Churchill and Edwin Lascelles, appeared on a memorial to their companion, George Lewis Langton,3 who was buried in the Protestant cemetery in Rome in September 1738, see Langton. Allgood and Lascelles were in Padua on 1 October 1738,4 and in Turin on 13 October, when Allgood wrote that he would set out 'the day after tomorrow & hope to be in London within a month'.5 A copy of Raphael's Pitti Madonna and two capricci of Italian classical buildings remain at Nunwick.6
Richard Rawlinson met Allott at the opera at Bologna early in June 1722 and noted his departure for Rome on 12 June. On 7 February 1723 Allott left Rome to return to Bologna, 'in order to go for Venice and from thence to England' (Rawlinson jnl.MSS).

Alston came to Italy early in 1731 with Sir James Gray. In Padua, where they were joined by Lord Boyne, they were described as going either to Spain or Constantinople1 and they duly set out from Venice in April, see Boyne. After their return they were recorded in Rome between 1 May and 30 June 1732,2 and in November that year Alston, with William Denny and Shuttleworth, was in trouble for beating a coachman in papal livery, an affair settled through the intervention of Sir Thomas Dereham (see William Denny). Alston alone was in Padua in January 1733.3 Gray and Alston left Venice in February, intending to travel home via Munich, Augsburg, Strasbourg and Paris.4

Alston was in Turin or Milan in April 1701.1 He was travelling in Italy with the 3rd Earl of Holderness and, apparently, one E. Thackeray, who was mentioned with him in Turin/Milan and later in Padua. Alston and Holderness visited the Duke of Shrewsbury in Geneva on 13 August 1701 with Edward Wortley Montagu, all 'lately come from Rome',2 where they had met Joseph Addison and George Dashwood.3 Alston and Holderness again saw Shrewsbury in Rome on 21 November and 11 December 1701, when they visited the Barberini Palace.2 They were in Florence in March 1702,4 and in Padua in April.5

Alves spent some eight years in Rome where, it was said, he turned Catholic and was 'a great bigot, pas trop sensé',1 although this did not apparently prevent him from practising with some success as a portrait and history painter and miniaturist. In March 1762 he won the concorso at the Accademia del Nudo in Rome (his pencil and chalk study of a male nude is preserved in the Accademia di S.Luca), implying that he had attended the previous winter term.2 On 14 July 1764 James Martin went with James Byres 'to Mr Avis's the History Painter - saw there a Picture composed & almost finished by Him repres'g the Shewing Joseph's bloody Coat to his Father Jacob. There is a great Deal of Expression in It. The Figures are much smaller than Life He had done a Copy of the Picture by Titian in the Borghese Palace repres'g a Venus binding the Eyes of a Cupid with three other Figures full as large as Life I think it one of the best Copys I ever saw'; on 29 October Martin again visited 'Avis' and referred to the same picture.3 In 1765, on 31 May and 3 and 4 June, James Boswell sat to him, also engaging Alves to make a miniature from his portrait by Willison.4 Apparently Boswell left the miniature with Andrew Lumisden who sent it to Robert Strange at Paris with instructions that it be shown to the 'Abbé Colbert, as a specimen of his nephew's work', before being sent on to Thomas Boswell in Scotland.5 In 1765 'Aves-pittore-Inglese-Cattolico-28' resided in the Palazzo Zuccari; in 1766 and 1767 'Anes, Pittore-Inglese-Cat.o' was living on the Strada Felice in a 'proprieta delle Scude Cristiane', and in 1769-71 'Alvo Inglese Protestante Pittore - 28' was listed in the Via Babuino at the same address as 'Archibaldi Smit Inglese Pittore - 32'.6

Amherst 'a pretty, well-behaved lad', was in Berne with George Cornewall in the summer of 1793, when both were intending to 'settle quietly at Morges, near Lausanne' to learn French and Italian, before spending the following winter in Italy.1 A year later they went from Augsburg, through Verona and Padua to reach Venice in September (their names variously given, e.g. as 'Aucheat' and 'Cornevach').2 In October they were in Florence being observed by Lady Webster who found Amherst 'a quiet, sedate young man, full of proprieties and all sorts of good things', in love with both her and Mrs W[yndham], and most with the one he saw last, while Cornewall, by contrast, was 'good-humoured and weak'.3 Soon after 20 October Amherst was presented to the Pope, with Lord Carmarthen and the Duke of Leeds.4 In April and May 1795 the two young men were in Rome, Amherst visiting the Spada Palace with Lady Plymouth and Lady Webster,5 who next saw them in Lucca in the summer.6 In 1795 Amherst was paying considerable attention to Lady Plymouth (whom he subsequently married), Lady Knight commenting that in Bologna he did 'all the leading honours to the lady, but I hear, fears his honoured uncle should know it'.7 He was in Rome in August 1795.8 By the end of the year Cornewall had stayed three weeks as an uninvited guest of the Drakes near Genoa, in order to be near 'Moranda (Mr Car's lady)' [unidentified], with whom he was in love, though she thought him 'very disagreeable'; he was intending to meet Amherst at Milan in March and travel home with him-but in February 1796 Amherst 'was still at Anchor at Plymouth' and, added Lady Berwick, 'if Ld P's eyes begin to open perhaps he may be surprised to see her Ladyship's shape so enlarged'.9 Lady Webster saw Lady Plymouth and Amherst in Rome and Tivoli in February 1796.10 See Other, 5th Earl of Plymouth.
The Dowager Duchess of Ancaster arrived in Florence on 24 November 1785, accompanied by her twenty-one-year-old daughter, Lady Georgiana Charlotte Bertie.1 They remained until New Year's Day when they left for Pisa and Rome,2 'to Ye great joy of us all,' wrote Anthony Aufrere, 'for they formalized our party'.3 They had already attempted to go to Rome once, but, wrote Mark Davis, 'were alarmed by the roads; and the breaking up of a carriage, [so] that they returned to Florence, giving up all idea of proceeding onward'.4 They eventually succeeded in reaching Rome by 18 January 1786,5 and on 8 March Lord Bulkeley observed that the Duchess 'is at home every evening and the best English and French frequent her house'.6 The Duchess was again expected in Rome in the autumn of 1791,7 but seems instead to have wintered at Nice.8 During the winter of 1792-3 she was at Naples, attended by a Miss Fellows and a Dr Drew, and with Lady Georgiana and her husband, Lord Cholmondeley (they had married in 1791).9 The Duchess was vacating lodgings on the Corso in Rome in April 1793,10 and travelled with Miss Fellows and Dr Edward Ash to Venice, arriving on 7 May, the day after her daughter and son-in-law.11 The Duchess went on to Lausanne, where Mary Carter pitied her for having such badly behaved attendants.12 In the autumn the Duchess apparently returned to Naples, where she died on 7 October 1793 in the same house as her daughter and son-in-law (but there were conflicting reports as to the date and place).13

Anderson had been in Italy c.1731 as tutor to Edward Wortley Montagu and he remained an intermediary between Lady Mary and her wayward son. He was possibly the John Anderson later recorded at Padua on 14 June 1746.1 In July 1750 he was travelling through Brescia with an unidentified pupil, when Lady Mary Wortley Montagu entrusted him with letters for England (but not parcels 'as he propos'd a long Tour'); he delivered them in London in February 1751.2



In April 1735 Stosch reported that 'Lord Andover and [Younger?, probably Richard Younger] since their arrival in Rome have made no scruples of dealing openly with Lady Nithsdale and other adherents and servants of the Pretender'; by July, Stosch knew Lord Andover had met and talked with the Pretender himself.1 Andover had his portrait painted in Rome (attributed to Antonio David; Ranger's House, Blackheath).

Francis Andrews had travelled with Richard Rigby in 1764, passing through Paris on his way south in August.1 In September 1766 he again set out from Paris, hoping to reach Turin early in October.2 Lady Holland met him in Bologna, where he was complaining that 'in the midst of vineyards he can't get a good glass of wine'.3 By November he was in Rome 'charmed with his expedition'. Lord Kildare saw him in Naples in December-January 1766-7,4 but he was back in Rome by March, when he told his friend Robert Fitzgerald that his [Andrews's] 'bust is finished and extremely like ... I shall leave this city on Easter Monday, and the intermediate time between that and the Ascension I shall spend in visiting Tuscany, and then set out for Venice'.2 According to Kildare 'and many gentlemen who lived much with him at Rome', Andrews displayed considerable talent in Italy where he 'charmed, and almost astonished the learned professors of Padua, by his classical attainments, and the uncommon quickness, purity, and ease, with which he addressed, and replied to them in the latin language' and he 'captivated our young men of rank then resident in Rome'.5 He sat to Anton Maron (Provost's House, Trinity Coll., Dublin), probably in 1767 when he wrote to Fitzgerald from Rome in March 'But why ask for my portrait? I would rather carry a chair in the dog-days [than] sit. And yet I believe you must have it. I accept yours with great thanks'. Maron had painted Fitzgerald in 1765. Also in the Provost's House are busts of Commodus and Caracalla and the 4th Duke of Bedford, and Hewetson's bust of Rigby, all probably among the busts left to the College by Andrews.6 In 1768 Sir James Wright in Venice had 'several cases of Pictures &c belonging to Andrews',7 amongst which were probably the Piranesis and books on Italian antiquities which Andrews bequeathed to his friend Rigby. To judge from his greatest monument, the Provost's House, Andrews was a well-connected and extravagant patron of conservative taste.
He arrived in Rome in December 1728 with two other Jacobites, Draper and Briscow;1 they shared the same house in the Piazza di Spagna2 until October 1730, when they left for Naples.3 By 1 September 1731 they had left Florence for England, Stosch describing Andrews as 'le Prêtre Anglican', and adding that the three had been known in Rome as 'violents Jacobites'.4
Travelling from Rome with 'Devort'[?], 'Sr Angerstein Inglese' arrived in Venice on 1 May, moving on the 28th to the house of Pietro Bartolini, a lawyer.1 On 6 July he was listed (retrospectively) as having been in Rome.2
On 16 December 1737 Stosch reported that Lord Annandale and Mr Forester left Florence for Rome 'last Monday'.1 In March 1738, with his 'Governor', Annandale visited George Sinclair of Ulbster in Rome and they met again in Turin in April, having 'posted from Rome in 8 days'.2 Annandale and Forester were presented at Court; Sinclair related how they had been complimented in Siena for their sobriety and held up as examples of how Englishmen should behave to be 'well received in company', but Sinclair also described how Annandale had 'f ... ed a Girl on Pont de St Angelo after getting d-k'.3 Horace Mann later recalled Annandale and 'one Mr Forrester' being together in Italy.4
Lord Annandale reached Venice on 17 February 1713,1 having been in Padua on the 13th.2 On 22 May he arrived in Naples, where he stayed two weeks before going to Rome with Sir James Cunynghame.3 On 3 June William Kent said that 'ye Earl Analdal' was one of the few English then at Rome,4 although John Fleetwood, writing on 20 June, said that Annandale and others had left Naples '10 ds since'. At the end of August he arrived in Turin from Genoa,5 and in September he was at Marseilles on his way to Montpellier.6 It appears that his son James, Lord Johnston was also abroad at this time, but it is not clear whether they went to Italy together.7 Annandale evidently made some purchases in Italy: 'The ship from Leghorn is not yett arrived', his London banker George Middleton told him on 29 September 1713; 'There will be no possibility of saveing the bookes, pictures, &c. from paying duty for no person of Quality will be excepted.'8
He was conceivably also the 'Mr Ansley' in Florence on 5 June 1796 who received a letter with news of the French invasion,1 and the 'Annesley Inglese' travelling from Florence with his wife and family who arrived in Padua on 16 June 1796, going on to Venice after a few days.2 [Alexander Annesley, d. 1813, a legal and political writer, was said to have paid repeated visits to the Continent; DNB].



Thomas Anson spent a large part of his early life abroad. In July 1723 he was with William Mytton and Simon Degge in Spa.1 He was recorded at Padua with Alan Brodrick in September 1724.2 In April 1725 he set out from Rome to Naples with Simon Degge and Thomas Kemp, and in May he left Rome with Degge for Florence.3 Anson later travelled further afield, apparently visiting the Levant in 1734 and the Middle East in 1740.4  In 1762 he inherited a considerable fortune from his younger brother, the naval hero and circumnavigator, George, 1st Baron Anson, who had died a widower. Thomas then embellished Shugborough with the help of James 'Athenian' Stuart and acquired works of art from Italy; some of his correspondence concerning such purchases from Sir John Dick, Thomas Jenkins, Bartolomeo Cavaceppi and Joseph Nollekens, survives in the Anson papers.5
Thomas Anson was seen by William Danby in Geneva, Florence and Rome between October and December 17881 and he arrived in Venice on 18 May 1789.2 While in Italy he made drafts on a William Stevenson from July 1788 to May 1789.3 He twice sat for his portrait while abroad, the artists and dates not known (one sold Christie's, 25 Jun. 1959, another priv. coll.).
The 'Commendatore Anson' in Verona at the end of July 1796 was presumably also the 'Anson Uff.Inglese' in Verona early in November that year travelling with Henry Tonbul and 'Grem' [Green?].1  Could he also have been the 'Commendatore Hanson Inglese' elected an Honorary member of the Accademia di Belle Arti in Parma on 20 June 1790?2
In February 1713 Anstruther was expected in Turin from Paris with Sir Thomas Hanmer and Captain William Philbyn; together they intended going on to pass the Carnival at Venice (SP 92/27, f.546; Payne, 7 Feb. 1713).





Apthorp went to Italy in 1763, following the death of his first wife, Horace Mann's niece. In January 1764 he was in Florence, where he ordered from Patch 'four landscapes, the size of Sir Horace's in the great room, for 50 sequins to be done in three months'.1 He arrived in Rome in February 1764 with a letter of introduction from Mann to Cardinal Albani,2 but was in Naples in March,3 having passed through Capua on 7 March.4 By May he had returned to Rome and, with his fellow Americans John Morgan, Thomas Palmer and Samuel Powel, was following a course of antiquities from James Byres.5 He frequently encountered James Martin between 5 May and 1 August and met Angelica Kauffman in July.6 It was presumably at this time that he sat to her (the portrait including his two daughters, who are said to have been added).7 In August he was in Bologna,8 and the following month he met Edward Gibbon in Florence, where he stayed until November.9 On 27 November he was again in Naples,10 where he spent five months and was very ill in February 1765. When he left in April he was uncertain whether he was going to England or America.11 Apthorp was (doubtfully) identified in Patch's Punch Party of 1761 (Chatsworth), on the basis of a comparison with an inscribed Patch caricature of Mr Apthorp (subsequently etched in 1770).12

On 10 March 1731 consul Skinner reported from Leghorn that 'Robert Arbuthnot, Paris banker, has been at Rome, [and with] one Macarty, surgeon to a Paris hospital, [has] embarked on The Pearl for Toulon.'1 In June 1732 charges were brought against him as a Jacobite who had passed on letters from the Pretender, but they were not proved.2
Captain Arbuthnot was serving in the Mediterranean from the autumn of 1749. In September 1751 he sailed from Portugal to Italy, stopping briefly at Port Mahon where Henry Conway missed his passage; Conway told Horace Mann that Arbuthnot had been in a hurry to see his wife whom he had left in Italy. Mann noted the Captain in Florence the following month, and in August 1752 he mentioned a Mrs Arbuthnot with her sister in Florence (Wal.Corr., 37:313-14;20:284-5, 327).

He was in Rome with John Bohun in February 1768,1 and they arrived in Venice on 20 August.2 On 7 September Charles Townley called on Sir John Blois, Bohun, and Arcedeckne, who was setting off that day for Florence.3 On 22 October Arcedeckne attended the dinner in Florence to mark Sir Horace Mann's investiture as a Knight of the Bath.4

In 1712 Archer was appointed with Stowell and Sir Henry Belasyse to the commission of enquiry into the state of British forces in Spain and Portugal. They arrived at Milan in February 1712 on their way to Turin, where several of their clerks awaited them.1 Stowell and Archer reached Genoa on 9 April,2 Belasyse having already arrived on 26 March.3 Stowell subsequently told Edward Harley that in Italy he had searched the shops in vain for two books which Harley had wanted, and had asked a friend in Venice to try to find them.4
Andrew Archer travelled with his tutor John Anderson (formerly tutor to Edward Wortley Montagu). In November 1756, when he was at Rome, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu proposed entrusting him with a gift for Lady Bute when he came to Venice the following spring.1 On Christmas Day 1756 Anderson attended a party at Richard Phelps's house in Rome,2 and at Easter 1757 Anderson and Archer were listed as residing on the Strada della Croce.3 By May 1757 they had arrived in Venice (Anderson called 'Pietro Andertson di Andrea').4 They left on 7 June with Lady Mary's commissions,5 but returned on the 30th, doubtless due to a 'very extraordinary Accident'-the explosion of a blunderbuss in Archer's hands; he was then 'under Cure to preserve two of his Fingers, which were very much torn;' Lady Mary then commended the 'Paternal Care and tenderness' shown by Anderson.6 On 6 July 1757 they again left Venice, accompanied by Richard Combe, Richard Woodward and William Watson.4 They appear to have returned home through Germany, Archer experiencing great difficulty in obtaining a passport owing to the French hostilities.7 By October Archer and Anderson had apparently discharged their commissions in London.8
John Archer was in Venice from 21 October to 1 November 1791 with his father and a Mr Rouchelle.1 Three weeks later he died in Florence. His tomb in the Leghorn cemetery is inscribed: 'John Archer Esq. Citizen of London who making the tour of Europe in company with his father was attacked with a fever at Bolognia [sic] which in a few days carried him off in the flower of youth at Florence on the 21st of Novr 1791 in the 23d year of his age'.2
Mr and Mrs Archer arrived in Florence on 11 July 1732, with Lord Middlesex, Lord Robert Montagu and Sewallis Shirley.1 A Mr Archer was listed as a member of the Masonic Lodge in Florence (founded by Lord Middlesex in July 1732).2 Thomas Archer was in Naples by February 1733 with Henry Harris, who wrote a poem entitled 'On Mrs [Strangways-]Horner's Sitting for her Picture to the famous Solimena, Painter at Naples, who was there with Mr Archer';3 Solimena had finished the portrait by 13 March 1733, see Strangways-Horner.
Thomas Archer (his name is variously spelt in the parish registers 'Arfa/Artcer/Arthour/ Artorre/Assur' and he was sometimes described as a Lutheran) resided in Rome near the Piazza di Spagna from 1726 until c.1740. In 1730-1 and 1735 he was sharing lodgings with James Murray, one of the Pretender's physicians.1 In October 1730 he was listed (as 'Arthur') among a number of Jacobites who had been with the Pretender in Rome2 and 'Mr Archer, a Gentleman of the chamber to the Pretender' was still in Rome in about 1740.3 See also Arthur 1733.
Arden, who had been tutor to Lord Spencer, accompanied Lord and Lady Spencer to Italy in 1763. In Rome in the spring of 1764 Arden made friends with David Garrick, who gave him his [Garrick's] bust by Nollekens, subsequently given by Arden's widow to Lord Spencer (C. Oman, Garrick, 237, 239-40).


He first came to Italy as Lord Lorne in the spring of 1701. He was in Padua on 24 March,1 arrived in Rome a month later, and left Rome 'for Holland' at the end of May or beginning of June.2 As Duke of Argyll he was again in Italy in 1711, on his way to assume command of the English forces in Spain. He arrived in Genoa with Lord Peterborough on 5 May3 on his way to Barcelona, where he arrived on 9 June. He was granted leave in October and revisited Italy briefly on his way back to England,4 arriving at Leghorn on 15 February 1712 and spending a few days in Florence. On hearing news of changes in London, he was forced to abandon hopes of visiting Rome and Naples.5 He stopped briefly in Venice, again meeting Lord Peterborough, before pursuing his journey via Milan, Turin and Utrecht to London.6
The 5th Duke of Argyll and his Duchess spent the winter of 1789-90 in Naples for the benefit of her failing health. They travelled with their younger daughters Charlotte and Augusta, who was accompanied by her husband Henry Mordaunt Clavering and her baby daughter1 (Augusta had eloped with Clavering in 1788, causing a considerable stir). They reached Venice on 21 October and were in Rome in November.2 During the winter months at Naples, the Duchess, who was as celebrated for her propriety as she had been for her beauty, caused some surprise by treating Emma Hart with great friendliness (which was not without effect in promoting Emma's career). Charlotte, already renowned for her beauty, sat to J.H.W. Tischbein in Naples (SNPG), the artist having first seen her being frightened by rushing coaches at the close of a Royal Hunt.3 The party left Naples at the end of April 1790 and was in Florence when Augusta gave birth to a second daughter on 24 May. Clavering had meanwhile visited Leghorn with Lord Titchfield, James Clitherow and Lascelles.4 The Claverings stayed in Italy after the remainder of the party had arrived back in London on 25 July 1790.5 Five months later the Duchess died.
Immediately after leaving Oxford Armitage spent a year in Italy, and his travel journal (Armitage jnl.MSS) reflects a serious if conventional curiosity. In Turin his eyesight was 'fatigued' by the 'regularity' of the streets; in Parma his enjoyment of Correggio was tempered by the constant sight of priests and beggars. Modena was the 'handsomest' city he had then seen in Italy. In Bologna he was most struck by Giambologna's Neptune, exemplifying 'strength joined with activity'. In Florence he found the Pitti was being repaired, but he was entranced by the Uffizi: 'if I see nothing else in Italy my journey is amply repaid by this one glorious sight'. He reached Rome on 16 October, staying first at Margherita's hotel before moving after two days into 'lodgings'. He met Thomas Jenkins and attended the conversazioni of Cardinal de Bernis (to whom he had delivered a letter from Lord Lansdowne), but his most regular companions were Giles Stanley (the British consul at Trieste) and his wife. In the Borghese Gardens he recognised two English artists, Turner and Hall (who now defy identification), and he was also to meet in Rome the artists John Frearson (whom he called Freeston), William Theed and Robert Freebairn (whom he called Fairbairn). He twice visited Mastralini, a wax modeller who had made a portrait of Emma Hart (later Hamilton).  Amongst his observations on antiquities Armitage remarked that eleven of the heads on the Arch of Titus were modern, owing, his cicerone explained, to 'a theft committed in the night by some English amateurs of antiquity'. Apart from virtù, Armitage took dancing lessons from Alexandrini and employed an Italian master; he discussed classics and mathematics with learned Jesuits and read Ariosto, Bentivoglio's Letters and Virgil, besides Burke's Reflections on the French Revolution which appeared while he was in Rome. He did not leave for Naples until the Carnival had begun, an 'incomprehensible festivity this to an Englishman'. In Naples he saw Sir William Hamilton's Etruscan vases and pictures, a collection which he thought exceeded 'by far [that of] the King of Naples'. In April and May 1791 he went on to Sicily and Malta accompanied by Walsh, 'a young Irish gentleman whose father lives in the County of Meath', and the journal contains some sketches of the temples near Agrigento. On his return Armitage went overland through Calabria to Paestum and Naples. He made, it appears, few purchases, but he mentioned buying three pieces of marble in Naples and engravings of the 220 self-portraits in the Uffizi in Florence. His tour also had its lighter moments: near Naples his servant conducted him to 'a bordello for sailors' when he had asked for a coffee house, and at Spoleto he was able satisfactorily to delay one Carolina from taking the veil in a convent at Gubbio, afterwards presenting her with a silver bottle case.
One of the most fashionable of London courtesans and a favourite with the Foxite Whigs, Mrs Armitstead travelled to Paris alone in July 1781, when the Prince of Wales stopped paying her bills. She soon took up with Lords Cholmondeley and Coleraine who followed her into Italy in December (there is otherwise no report of Coleraine being in Italy).1 She and Lord Cholmondeley, who had pursued her 'through every town in Italy like the stricken deer with an arrow in her side',2 left Italy together in February 1782. Charles James Fox began to live with Mrs Armitstead in 1783, and they went to the Continent for a short tour after the 1788 election. They reached Italy via Paris (August) and Switzerland (September).2 Mrs Armitstead became 'wild about' the Correggios in Parma, and admired Guercino at Cento. In October they were staying with James Hare in Venice,3 where Mrs Armitstead met the composer Gazzaniga. Their tour ended abruptly when Fox was informed in Bologna in mid-November of George III's insanity. Fox rushed home, Mrs Armitstead leaving him at Lyons to travel at a more leisurely pace. After their secret marriage in 1795 the Foxes again visited Italy in 1802.
Armstrong visited Italy for his health and he sailed out with Henry Fuseli, whom he had first met in Berlin in 1764 and whose studies in Italy he was to support.1 They landed at Genoa and Armstrong alone spent two weeks with the ailing Tobias Smollett at Leghorn early in May.2 According to Knowles, Armstrong had quarrelled with Fuseli,3 but they were together in Florence on 19 May4 and in Rome in July 1770.5 In September Armstrong was in Paris with Andrew Lumisden (to whom he was related), who found him 'tolerably well',6 and by 10 December 1770 he had 'returned in better health.'7 In 1771, under the pseudonym Launcelot Temple, Armstrong published A Short Ramble through some parts of France and Italy, in which he described Michelangelo's paintings in the Sistine Chapel as 'a prodigious display of sublime, melancholy, and dreadful imagination'-quite in the Fuseli manner.

He was in Florence early in February 1755, when Robert Adam met him at Horace Mann's and noticed 'the Marchionni, the Flame of Sir John Armitage' at several of the Carnival balls; later that month Adam met Sir John at Siena on his way to Rome,1 where he sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 191; Christie's, 8 July 1994).
Joseph Armytage began his travels in France on the eve of the Revolution. In December 1789 he was in Nice obtaining letters of introduction for Siena, where he intended perfecting his Italian. Three years later, at Turin in November 1792, he obtained letters of introduction for Milan, Pisa and Padua. In March 1793 a friend writing from Pisa lamented Armytage's departure from Florence for England; he went via Venice, where he appears to have stayed until August; he then obtained a pass for his journey home through Ferrara and Germany (Hotchkin MSS, 6/1; Lincs.RO, notes by RBF).

By the time he took up the RA travelling scholarship to Italy in 1795 at the age of thirty-two, Artaud was established as a history painter. The four years he spent in Italy, which coincided with the French invasion, are vividly described in a series of letters and draft letters now preserved in the John Rylands Library at Manchester.1  He sailed from Portsmouth at the end of July 1795 but, being detained at Gibraltar, did not arrive at Leghorn, where he faced two weeks quarantine, until 6 December. He sailed on to Civitavecchia to reach Rome in January 1796. Already news was arriving of the French invasion of northern Italy and by the end of February Artaud left for Naples.2 A 'violent Democrat', according to Farington,3 Artaud assured his father (4 Jun. 1796) that he 'contemplated the progress of the French with no other emotion than what was excited by the wonderful exertions of that extraordinary people'. He spent two months in Naples, with Henry Thomson and his father; he witnessed Emma Hamilton's 'attitudes' and made sketches of Neapolitan costume (BMPL). By 10 May he was back in Rome, lodging in the Piazza Barberini. He was sharing rooms with Mercati, a landscape painter whom he had met through Guy Head; he knew the sculptor John Deare, whose wife he drew in May 1796 (BMPL sketchbook) and met the miniaturist Alexander Day, the elderly Gavin Hamilton (whose antiquarian business was then in a state of collapse) and Thomas Jenkins. At Tivoli in October, Artaud found himself part of an international gathering of artists at Chico's Inn.  Throughout his stay he maintained his resolve to be a history painter, although circumstances were not in his favour; Thomas Macklin, the London publisher for whom he had previously undertaken work, stayed silent, and there was in any case the difficulty of transporting large pictures back to England in unsettled times. In June and July Artaud proceeded with his copies of Titian, Raphael, Andrea del Sarto, Giulio Romano and Schidone (VAM sketchbook). By 17 September 1796 he had painted the portrait of William Hillary and was contemplating an Ossianic subject, The Spirit of Loda (exh. RA 1800).  He remained in Rome for the Carnival in the New Year, but as the French approached, he again left for Naples, taking his paintings and leaving his books to be forwarded. He arrived on 24 February 1797. His lodgings were too small to paint in, but he continued copying at Capo di Monte, even though, as he told his father (25 Mar.), 'I am fully convinced that there is more improvement in painting one original Picture while surrounded by the fine Works of other Masters to which you can occasionally refer, than in making twenty copies from those Works themselves.' He met Hillary again, as well as Edward Swinburne, John Rushout and William Henry Lambton. In May, with Richard Duppa, R.R. Reinagle, Thomson and Swinburne, he toured round the bays of Salerno and Naples (VAM and BMPL sketchbooks). They returned to Rome in June 1797 and Artaud began work on another large history piece commissioned by Robert Bowyer for a new edition of Hume's History of England. The picture remains unknown, but there are various sketches of historical scenes (the Maid of Orleans and the Discovery of Arthur's Tomb) in Artaud's sketchbook in the BMPL. On 20 November 1797 Artaud told John Landseer that he had done all the studies for this picture, although he would have difficulty in conveying it to England.  Perhaps because of such constraints, Artaud diversified his activities, finding employment as a guide and dealer. He commissioned Italian views for Hillary and Graves (draft to Hillary, 4 Dec.), but his principal client was Lambton, a fellow democrat, from whom he received 'a continuous series of civilities' (draft to Hillary, 27 Aug.). Artaud acted as his cicerone, although the changing face of Rome made instruction difficult; works of art were being removed against the arrival of the French and 'museums and churches are stripped of their choicest ornaments, Miserable copys or casts in Plaster substituted for the most exquisite originals - everything in a state of disorder' (draft to Wilson, Jul. 1797]). He procured for Lambton paintings by other artists in Rome, as the Swiss Franz Kaisermann and 'Fredrigo the German', and was himself commissioned to paint Lambton's new-born son, three copies of portraits and, of greater interest, an allegorical composition based on Erasmus Darwin's Loves of the Plants, 'illusive to the French Revolution', provisionally entitled by Artaud Liberty tearing the veils of ignorance and superstition from his Eyes (a drawing for which is in the VAM). But in October Lambton, in failing health, left for Pisa where he died in November. Artaud was then attending a Mr Fuller, a young amateur (20 Nov., draft to John Landseer), who introduced him to the traveller and writer Mariana Starke. She was evidently impressed with him, and in her Travels in Italy (1:252) described Artaud as 'a young painter ... whose distinguished abilities and close application have already placed him, in the opinion of foreign connoisseurs, at the head of this elegant and fascinating art'. His letters at this time describe the Roman nobility fawning on Joseph Bonaparte (4 Dec., draft to Hillary; 15 Dec., draft to Terrey), and in February 1798 the French finally invaded Rome. 'The temporal power of the Papacy is extinguished - the Roman Republick now successfully re-established', Artaud enthused; 'Fired with the glow of patriotick enthusiasm, every roman should now exert all his effort and endeavour to make the new Republick rival the Old' (draft to Mariana Starke, c.Feb. 1798). But Artaud's enthusiasm was soon tempered. His last letter from Rome to his father (24 Feb.) lamented that the city would never again be the place for study to any artist but an architect, 'for except the Stanze of Raphael and the works of Michael Angelo in the Sistine Chapel, every other fine thing will be sent to Paris'. He later told his father (2 Apr.) he had seen the 'licentious' French cavalry and, while dining with Lord Ossulston and Davy near the Trinita dei Monti, he had witnessed an uprising against the French followed by summary executions. He also discovered that he was liable to join the National Guard and at this point, as he explained to his father, he 'thought it high time to be off, for I had no idea of hazarding my life for a set of people like the Romans, who are so completely corrupted and depraved that they are equally incapable of fulfilling the duties either of good subjects or good Citizens under any form of Government. Their situation is, however, in some measure to be commiserated, for, to use their own expression, their old Government robbed them of their garments, but their liberators will even carry off their skins' (1 May 1798).  At the end of March he left Rome for the third and last time. He spent five months in Florence where he painted the portrait of Fabroni, the Grand Duke's Professor of Chemistry and Natural Philosophy, who held distinguished conversazioni (1 May, 2 Jul., to his father). On 7 August, preparing for his return to England, he advised his father to collect his cases of books and prints accompanied by two Academicians, who would vouch at Customs that they were essential for study. He then found that English travellers were forced to proceed via Vicenza, and on 7 September 1798 he wrote from Venice that he would make short excursions to Vicenza and Padua before embarking for Trieste. After spending nearly a year in Dresden, he finally returned to England in October 1799.



Henry Arundell was in Padua on 12 May 1715.1 'Mr. Lord Arundel of Wardour,' travelling with Mr Enley, spent four days at Aix the following November, during which they twice visited Henry Lee Warner.2

After his schooling at the Jesuit College of St Omer, he went to the Turin Academy, where Jacob Houblon met him 'with Mr Newton (by some said to be a Jesuit)' in THe latter parT OF 1758.1 He spent over a year at Turin and then travelled with his Jesuit governor, Charles Booth, to Genoa and Florence,2 where they arrived between 5 and 10 November.3 Arundell celebrated his twentieth birthday in Rome (30 March 1760) 'among the Ruins of Imperial Palace in the garden of the English College',4 and at some stage he visited Parma where Padre Canonici later rEMEMBERED Seeing him.5 For his subsequent collecting, see Father John Thorpe.
Stepson of the 8th Earl of Pembroke (whom his mother married in 1708), he appears in the group portrait painted for Sir Andrew Fountaine by Giulio PignattA IN THE TRIBUNA IN FLOREnce in 1715 (see Fountaine). On 14 January 1716 Arundell was in Rome with Anthony Lowther and Fountaine,1 and they left Venice together for Germany on 26 September 1716,2 Fountaine and Arundell visiting Padua on the 30th.3
Elected to a Radcliffe travelling fellowship (see John Moore) in 1790, Ash was probably the 'Mr Ase Inglese' who spent a week in Venice in November 1792.1 In May 1793 'Ash' came to Venice with the invalid Dowager Duchess of Ancaster and her attendant Miss Fellows.2 In September 1793 he was in Switzerland enjoying the company of Miss Fellows3 who, according to Mary Carter, was consoling herself 'with the adorations of a young prigg of a physician, Dr Ash'.4 On 29 December Sarah Bentham met Ash in Rome and said he was then on his way from Geneva to Naples.5 A month later, on 28 January 1794, she again saw him in Rome, this time remarking that Ash had spent 'more than two years in Germany and Italy'.5 He also met in Rome Count Rumford, who told Lord Palmerston that Ash was leaving Rome at the end of May 1794 to join him in Verona; the two then travelled together to Munich where they had arrived by 22 June.6
A lady-in-waiting to one of the daughters of the Queen of Naples, she married in June 1800 Signor Perconte (a secretario refferendario del Regno) in the Queen's private chapel in Palermo. She described her wedding to Lady Elizabeth Foster, whom she addressed as 'My own dear Mama, my kind my generous benefactress'.1 On 8 February 1799 Lady Elizabeth Foster in London had written to Emma Hamilton asking 'what has become of a person you was very good to, poor Miss Ashburner. I am very anxious about her, and wrote to her twice without getting any answer.'2 On 18 August Lady Foster wrote again asking whether she could not 'let [Miss Ashburner] be a bride at last? I really believe Perconte to be a worthy man'.3  A Mrs Ashburner had attended Lady Elizabeth Foster in Italy in 1783 and was described by Lady Bristol as 'a pert gallant, corrupt femme de chambre', but she referred shortly afterwards to 'poor Mrs Ashburner's letter'.4 She was conceivably the 'Miss A.' / 'Mlle. A.' / 'Miss Ash:' who appears in Lady Elizabeth Foster's continental journals in 1785: the 'Miss A.' at Lyons (whose affairs she settled and 'made her happy'), the 'Miss Ash:' who was to come 'in a few days' to Ischia on 21 June 1785, and the 'Mlle. A.' of whom she took leave 'with an indescribable pang in my heart' at Ischia on 22 July.5
In February 1745 Lord Ashburnham attended a banquet given in Venice by Lord Holderness, the British ambassador, in honour of the Society of Dilettanti. Two months later Sir James Gray, then secretary at the British embassy in Venice, successfully proposed him for membership of the Society.1 On the 6 April 1745 Ashburnham and his tutor, Edward Clarke, were in Padua.2 In September he was ill with smallpox in Florence. Horace Mann later remembered how 'he despised the nobility here, because they did not adore him', and how Clarke humoured Ashburnham's pride; they did not go to Rome because of Clarke's resistance to the Jacobite court where his brother was employed.3 James Russel later referred (20 Oct. 1746) to a picture purchased by 'Mr Clerk, who travelled with my Lord Ashburnham, who was at Florence while I was there'.4

On completing a year of study at Leiden, Askew visited Hungary, Athens, Constantinople and Italy. While abroad he acquired many books and manuscripts which became the Biblioteca Askeviana for which he is chiefly remembered. At Rome he met James Russel, who dedicated to him a plate in the second volume of his Letters. On his return to England Askew delivered a copy of Venuti's Descrizione delle prime scoperte dell'antica citta d'Ercolano [1748] to Russel's father who told his son, 'He gives you a good character,' adding that Askew 'has the reputation here of being a great Grecian and has brought home with him a large number of inscriptions, never taken notice of before, which he collected in the islands of the Archipelago' (7 Sep. 1749; Add.41169, f.37).
At Leghorn in January 1755 Askew entertained Robert Adam and Charles Hope-Weir, taking them to an Italian comedy and giving them a private recital by the celebrated violinist Pietro Nardini at his home, where they also met Mr Hemslow, an English merchant who played the flute. Adam thought Askew 'a man quite calculate for gallantry and quite unfit for business. His money alone has procured him a partnership, as also his chariot, his mistress and his life of idleness. But by his good nature and obliging turn he is liked by all but respected by none'.1 He was possibly Askew the Leghorn merchant who in 1761 brought a letter from Florence to Turin, departing on 31 March 'to proceed to Geneva, Bern, &c, and so to England as expeditiously as possible'.2
William Assheton travelled with his cousin Richard Assheton, and his contemporary Thomas Pitt (b. c.1758, of whom little is known).1 In October 1783 they arrived in Turin and on the 26th were presented at Court by the British envoy, John Trevor.2 In the course of their journey through Italy they often encountered the Berrys and John Parkinson,3 but they were most frequently with Sir James Graham and his tutor Thomas Brand; all five sat to Angelica Kauffman in Rome in December 1783 (Assheton's portrait remains in a priv. coll.).4 In Rome Assheton, an amateur artist, made contact with other artists, including Captain Koehler (aide-de-camp to General Elliot in Gibraltar) and Jacob More. His letters and diaries also indicate a keen interest in topography and architecture-detailed descriptions of buildings being often accompanied by measurements.5 Downham still contains many of Assheton's Italian purchases,6 including copies of old masters, etchings by Piranesi, and a series of landscapes by Carlo Labruzzi (who may have given him lessons in Rome). Assheton's own watercolour landscapes made on his tour are the same size as, and are framed to match, the Labruzzis; some may have been copied by Anthony Devis.7

Lady Astley and one of her sons were in Florence in December 1783.1 In February 1784 her younger son, William (1769-89) 'about twelve years of age' set sail from Leghorn on the Great Duchess of Tuscany, which was seized by 'Sclavonians' who sent him to Corsica with the rest of the crew. 'Poor Lady Astley with her eldest son and sister is in Rome, bewailing to distraction the fate of the younger son', wrote Horace Mann,2 who placed her under the care of Mrs Minnifie in Rome.3 William Assheton recorded meeting a Captain Astley in Rome in 1783/844 and an 'Ashley' was in Rome on 2 March 17841 (possibly Jacob Henry Astley [1756-1817], Lady Astley's eldest stepson, then a captain of the East Norfolk militia, or Edward Astley [1761-1806], her own eldest son, who was in the life guards).5 The captured ship was retaken at Zante late in April. William Astley was sent to London in an English brig in May and his mother, who was still in Florence in April, was in Turin in June.6 The episode furnished a tragedy which played in Leghorn at the beginning of June.7 See Capt. William Blackett.
Astley was elected Worts travelling scholar (see Thomas Kerrich) in 1789 and is known to have visited Italy and Holland.1 He spent three days in Venice in March 1790,2 and a month later Elizabeth Gibbes saw 'a very unfavorable likeness' of him in Tofanelli's studio in Rome (priv. coll.).3
With a Mr Hall, Sir John Astley was in Rome from June to August 1730, in which time he met Stosch, who did not rate him highly; 'je ne scaurai vous marquer son Caractère, parce qu'il n'en a point, s'étant amusé icy voir les Antiquitez, dont il n'avoit aucunne Idée, sans se mêler de Politique ni Intrigues dont il est également Ignorant'.1 'J. Astley' was in Padua on 6 October 1730.2  Astley may have deceived Stosch, since his name had been sent to the Pretender in 1721 as a probable supporter and in 1752 he took his son-in-law, Anthony Langley Swymmer, to Paris to meet the Pretender and discuss a proposal to restore the Stuarts.3
John Astley was patronised by the 4th Earl of Chesterfield who may have sponsored his Italian visit.1 He had spent two years in Florence by February 1750 when Horace Mann recommended him to Cardinal Albani in Rome as one with 'rare application' and 'irreproachable manners' who wished to study drawing under Batoni for a few months.2 By Easter 1751 Astley was sharing rooms at Rome in the Palazzo Zuccari with Joseph Wilton and Simon Vierpyl.3 In Rome Astley met Joshua Reynolds (with whom he had studied under Thomas Hudson in London) and a portrait drawing of Reynolds, dated Rome, May 1750 (BMPL) was once attributed to him. Northcote recounted how in Rome Astley wore a waistcoat the back of which 'was made, by way of thriftiness, out of one of his own pictures, and thus displayed a tremendous waterfall on his back, to the great diversion of all the spectators.'4  Lack of money soon forced him to return to Florence where he executed several copies of old masters for Mann, including the Guercino Hagar and Ishmael which Mann had purchased for Lord Rockingham in 1751; the copy was made without Rockingham's knowledge, and had fooled an Italian connoisseur.5 Astley also painted Mann's portrait for Walpole (now WSL) who found it good in colouring but not very well drawn; Mann replied that if Astley was as 'perfect in drawing as he is in the other branches of his profession he would be an excellent painter.'5 Writing from Rome on 30 April 1751 Reynolds said that in two months he hoped to 'take the tour of Venice and through Germany' with Astley,6 but Reynolds was still in Rome in 1752 as Astley was returning home. He passed through Paris, where Lord Cardigan touted him as 'le Titien Anglois', and was back in London in July 1752.7
John Astley was in Padua 'pro secundo' on 30 January 1716,1 and was doubtless also the 'Mr Astley sone to Sr Jacob' who arrived in Venice in the first week of February 1716 with 'Mr Scipping [Skipping] late Consul at Lisbon'.2 He may also have been the Astley whom William Kent noticed in Rome between 24 November 1714 and 12 October 1715.3
On his first visit to Italy 'Hervey Aston' was accompanied by a lady described as his wife; they had 'lately' arrived in Venice on 22 January 1765.1 'Mr Aston' was noticed in Rome on 1 and 7 April and again in Naples on 24 April.2 On 7 May 'Aston Hervey' was staying in Naples,3 and on 21 May John Wilkes wrote that Aston had spent a month there, 'not with the Mrs Aston who was at Paris, but a French Mrs Aston - who diverted us very much. They lodged at an inn called Stephano's'.4 On 27 June 'Enrigo Aston' applied to send twenty-nine pictures back to England 'di autori boni non Singolari' and he applied to send a further twenty-six paintings on 17 December.5 On his later visit to Italy he was described by Horace Mann as first cousin 'to My Lord Harvey, Bishop of Derry' and as 'a great martyr to the gout'.6 He may have been the Aston reported in Florence on 30 March 1778;7 Henry Swinburne met him at Mann's in May 1779.8
Colonel Aston and 'Mylord Beilai'[?] arrived in Florence on 30 April 1768;1 on 16 July Charles Townley wrote from Rome to a 'Mr Aston' (apparently in Italy) reminding him of his debt of £60; he requested that £56 should be paid to 'Jack Barry' [James Barry, the painter] through the banker Belloni at Rome. At Bologna on 12 January 1772 Townley lost £20 'at Pharo at Aston's',2 possibly the same person.


Atkinson was in Naples in January 1777 when permission was sought to introduce him to the King, with Lord Dalrymple and a Mr Morant.1 He was probably the 'Antonio Atchinson-22' residing in the Strada Felice in Rome at Easter 1777.2
Father Atkinson, a 'Scots Jesuit in a college of priests just by the Church of Loretto' told Joseph Spence in April 1732 that if the Turks or any other potent enemy should fall upon the treasury there, 'God would be in their defense, for they had no other to trust to'.1 Father Atkinson, 'the English Penitentiary' called on Martin Folkes in Loreto on 23 October 1733, offering to show him the treasury.2
Atwell accompanied the 2nd Earl Cowper to Italy and described much of his tour in letters to Lady Sarah Cowper, Lord Cowper's sister.1 He was concerned at the degeneracy of the Tuscans, which he explained by their recent loss of independence, and was surprised by the number of English travellers.2 He was not convinced of the educational value of the grand tour, stressing 'the advantage [the English] have over Forreigners in the Goodness of our Climate [and] the happiness of our Civil Constitution', and the contrast between the disillusionment of older visitors and 'Boys just escaped from the lash of a severe Master, & the tedious confinement to Books and Studies [to visiting a] foreign Country where they first give a full swing to their Passions, & lead such lives as they are sensible would be attended with shame at Home'.3 See William, 2nd Earl Cowper.

John Aubrey was in Italy with William Cleaver. John Morgan, who met them separately in Turin in August and September 1764, thought Aubrey may then have been travelling in Lord Mountstuart's party and gave him a letter of introduction to consul Jamineau at Naples.1 They met James Martin at Florence on 10 and 17 November 1764,2 and Sir William Farington at Rome on 2 April and 12 May 1765.3 Aubrey was probably the Mr 'Obrey' noted by Andrew Lumisden on 17 July as leaving Rome for Terni (and probably Loreto), accompanied by James Byres.4 Aubrey and Cleaver saw Horace Walpole in Paris on 21 October 1765,5 and on their return to London joined Gibbon's Roman Club.6

Aufrere left Norfolk for the Continent early in 1785 'in innumerable distresses and difficulties', his debts having 'exceeded all Reason', and he was to spend the rest of his life in exile.1 The details of his itinerary in Italy are not clear, but by February 1785 he had met the Rev. William Gunn in Pisa and they visited Florence together. Gunn introduced him in Pisa to Mr and Mrs Minnifie, Mr and Mrs Mallock and General James Lockhart and his daughter Marianna, and urged him to study Italian and keep a journal. Gunn returned to England that autumn but Aufrere continued to correspond with him, obtaining books and prints for him, sending him scholarly pages from his journal, and passing on the gossip of Tuscany. Aufrere appears to have remained based in Tuscany, except for brief excursions to Naples, where he was the 'Cavalier' to a 'Duchessa E...' (before January 1786), to Geneva in the summer of 1786, and to Venice on 8 May 1787.2  By the time Gunn returned to the Continent in 1792 Aufrere had married Marianna Lockhart in Pisa (19 February 1791) and was settled in Heidelberg, whence he offered much advice on travel and sight-seeing, revealing something of his own travels. He frequently mentioned paintings not to be missed in various towns: Genoa, Turin, Verona, Vicenza, Padua (Guido, St John in the Desert), Venice, Ferrara, Cento (some fine things by Guercino), Pesaro, Fano, and the Pistoia and Lucca route to Pisa from Florence, 'one of the most beautiful routes in Italy'. In Rome he recommended Gunn to Lady and Miss Cornelia Knight, and he also mentioned Flaxman (who first arrived in Rome in December 1787) and his drawings, which he thought in 'grand and masterly style, full of fire and grace, and wholly after the Greek manner. I mean the early simple style ... I make no doubt of his executing them with much purity and elegant simplicity'. On his return to England Gunn met the Aufreres in Mannheim in September 1793. In 1795 Aufrere published a translation from the German Travels through the Kingdom of Sicily by Salis Marschlins (first published in Leipzig in 1793). Aufrere returned to Italy after 1815 and continued writing to Gunn with news and gossip concerning paintings and exhibitions in Milan, Pisa and Tuscany. He died in Pisa on 29 November 1833.3
On 17 June 1770 Joshua Reynolds told William Hamilton that Aufrère had 'brought back to England a Marriage of St Catherine by Corregio' (unidentified), implying Aufrère had been to Italy.1 In 1778 Piranesi included two objects from Aufrère's collection in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi. At his death Aufrère was said to have formed 'one of the finest collections of paintings in the country', comprising principally Italian pictures of the 16th and 17th centuries.2
Prince Augustus Frederick, tall, affable and asthmatic, spent nearly ten years in Italy, primarily for his health, but after his illicit marriage with Lady Augusta Murray in 1793 he was also a disconsolate wanderer, rejected by his father George III. He had originally been sent in 1786 with his brothers Ernest and Adolphus to Göttingen University, but he fell behind in his studies due to his illness and doctors recommended that he should seek a milder climate each winter.1 In 1788-9 he was in Hyères. He came to Florence in December 1789, travelling privately as Count Diepholz [or Liepholtz] and attended by doctors. He thought Tuscany 'the happiest part of Italy' and at Pisa he admired the Grand Duke, Peter Leopold, a 'Sovereign who likes His Subjects and the Subjects adore their Sovereign' (18 Jan. 1790). From Pisa he also confessed to some debts (which the King settled), and in Florence in June he had a disagreement with one of his close attendants, Captain F.W. von Linsingen, whom he felt had let him down before the Queen of Hungary ('exposing my character'). He was in Venice for Ascension. He was back in Germany between June and November 1790, his health temporarily recovered to the extent that he asked the King whether he could not join the navy, as had been originally intended. But a relapse soon followed; 'I trust', he told the King, 'the warm climate of Italy will set me up again'. He passed through northern Italy on his way to Hyères, visiting the Certosa di Pavia, which he found 'truly astonishing,' and he admired the Strada Nuova in Genoa (30 Dec. 1790), where he met both Dr William Batt ('a sensible, clever man') and Lord Bruce. In the summer of 1791 Augustus stayed in France and Switzerland; in July he proposed to the King that he should be allowed to enter the church, a 'quiet' profession free from 'politicks', but he received no answer. In October 1791 he returned to Italy with his doctors. In Turin he lodged with the British envoy, John Trevor, and expressed great interest in learned societies (10 Jan. 1792). In Parma he saw Bodoni's printing press,2 and in Bologna he attended the opera and praised the soprano Crescenti; he met Fontana, 'one of the cleverest men in Italy', he told the King, whose 'knowledge of Mineralogy is very great' (10 Jan. 1792). In Rome he stayed at the Locanda Nobile in the Palazzo Barazzi,3 with Thomas Jenkins acting as his agent and banker. On 22 November 1791 he had an audience with Pope Pius VI 'who was very civil [and] kept me about twenty minutes', and he remarked on the 'vast number of English here'. It was probably in 1792 that the Prince commissioned Jacob More to execute a twenty-foot panorama of Rome for Buckingham House (untraced); More died the following year and in his will he mentioned a gold watch the Prince had given him.4 The Prince passed that winter in Naples, eventually taking a 'comfortable' house in Portici. Lord Plymouth and Lord Malmesbury were among his companions in Naples and Lady Malmesbury remarked that the Prince 'lives entirely on potatoes and water, and yet is quite a colossus'.5 Lady Anne Hatton (despite living with John, Lord Hervey) made a set at him, which was averted.6 The Prince meanwhile proceeded to examine Sir William Hamilton's collection of antiquities and visited Pompeii and other sites (7 Feb., 17 Mar. 1792). In April the he was back in Rome, intending to set out 'pour continuer ses courses en Italie';7 in May he was in Venice and in June in Milan, admiring 'some good English instruments' in the Observatory. Between June and September 1792 he was again in Switzerland and Germany. In October 1792 the Prince was back in Milan feeling 'greatly better', and he arrived in Rome in November, staying in a palace near the church of S.Carlo on the Corso. In January 1793 he was elected Regio Pastore d'Arcadia in the Arcadian Academy, and he began to visit artists' studios. In 1793 with Robert Fagan he obtained a licence to conduct excavations in Ostia, the process facilitated by his good relationship with the Pope.8 One of Fagan's sitters that year was Lady Augusta Murray who was in Italy with her mother, Lady Dunmore, and, although she was some ten years older than the Prince, he became hopelessly enamoured of her. Sir William Hamilton, for one, considered that she was by no means worthy of the Prince: 'of that I am sure by her behaviour during her stay in Naples [in 1792]', but, regardless of worldly opinion, the Prince secretly married her at Rome on 4 April 1793, the ceremony being conducted by the Rev. William Gunn at the hotel where Lady Augusta and her mother were staying. Soon afterwards, Lady Dunmore moved with her daughter to Florence, discreetly following Augustus.9 It was at this time in Florence that the Prince sat for his portrait to Gauffier (Royal Coll.; replicas sold Christie's, 11 Jul. 1986, and 24 Apr. 1987). On 17 June 1793 Lord Bruce, living near Florence, reported to his father that Augustus had 'set off somewhere' (doubtless a retrospective comment about Florence); his health had improved and he wanted to return to England; as for reports about Lady Augusta, he was persuaded there was no truth in them.10  On 7 May Augustus had complained to his brother, the Prince of Wales, that he had not heard from the King for 'nearly three years, and I write constantly once a fortnight', but by 23 June Augustus had at last received his father's permission to return home. He sailed from Leghorn on 2 August and arrived at Spithead on 19 September. Lady Augusta, pregnant, followed. A second secret marriage ceremony took place on 5 December 1793 at St George's, Hanover Square, and the following month Lady Augusta gave birth to a son (Augustus Frederick d'Este, 1794-1848).  The Prince then suffered a severe asthmatic attack, as a result of which he set sail alone for Leghorn on 16 January 1794. On his arrival he heard that the King had learned of his marriage11-which was promptly anulled-and had forbidden Lady Augusta to leave England. On 11 March Augustus was again in Rome, where Thomas Jenkins had furnished an apartment for him at the Palazzo Correa.12 With the exception of excursions to Tivoli and the Campagna, and longer stays at Grottaferrata and Naples, he lived in a melancholy state in Rome until June 1796. He was soon admitting the indiscretion of his marriage, and saying his heart and head were broken; in September 1794 he told the Prince of Wales that for three months he had lived 'like a hermit' in a house in the 'Bishoprick of the Cardinal of York' (3 Sep. 1794), and later he told him he was an 'unhappy being wandering among the ruins of Ancient Rome' (25 Oct. 1794). Perhaps to console himself, the Prince developed his interests in archaeology and the arts. His collection of music was 'daily augmenting' (30 Dec. 1794); he was recommending Reselli as a music master, and he regularly attended concerts. In October 1795 he gave an important collection of minerals to the Collegio Nazareno museum.13  Meanwhile the excavations at Istria with Fagan proceeded and in 1794, with Sir Corbet Corbet and Fagan, he engaged in excavations at Campo Iemini. Some of the sculptures unearthed were presented to the Prince of Wales (among them a Venus of the Capitoline type, later given by William IV to the British Museum); others (including the Mithras group) were placed in the Vatican.8 In 1796, with Fagan and the Duke of Braschi, he began excavations at Velletri; after he had left Rome Augustus disputed possession of the huge 'Pallas' found there early in 1797, but it was requisitioned by the French and carried off to Paris, where it remains.14  Augustus was generous, even indiscriminate, in his patronage of British artists in Rome. In April 1794 he received from them an address (Rome List 1794) thanking him for obtaining the long-sought permission to import their works of art into England free of duty. He sat for bust portraits to the sculptors Hewetson (1794) and John Deare (1795), both now untraced; Fagan was painting his portrait in February 179515 and he sat to Angelica Kauffman in November that year for a (now untraced) full-length portrait in Highland dress (which was specially sent out from Scotland);16 Guy Head's portrait (generally dated c.1798) is now in the NPG. On 15 November 1794 the Prince was offering to buy for the Prince of Wales a fine marble chimneypiece by an English sculptor in Rome (the figures drawn by Peters) for £300; on 7 June 1795 he bought a mosaic chimneypiece designed by George Hadfield and executed by John Deare (see Hadfield), from whom, as he told his brother on 13 June, he purchased in all three chimneypieces. He carried a torch at the funeral of James Durno in November 1795. The Prince was made an honorary academician at the Accademia di S.Luca on 25 May 1795.17  The Prince was frequently observed in Rome by English visitors. In 1796 J.B.S. Morritt said he held a 'general conversazione' every Sunday and was 'very civil and easy, without any humbug or nonsense in his manners'.18 Lady Knight, predictably, disagreed, deploring the depraved morals and dangerously liberal views of Augustus and his friends: 'Even a Grub St journal would be contaminated with all the tales that are told'.19 Her daughter Cornelia described one of Lady Plymouth's parties given for the Prince on his twenty-third birthday in 1796 'where the company was so bad that all the Roman Lady's & even some young Englishmen kept away.'20 In June 1796, on receiving the news of the occupation of Bologna by French troops, the Prince went to Naples. A few days before his departure, he had been mobbed in the streets by a crowd begging him to deliver them from the French,21 and it was said he was getting a frigate to collect the English.22 Betsey and Eugenia Wynne frequently saw him in Naples,23 where they had adjoining rooms in the Britannia hotel. Augustus gave Betsey away at her wedding to Thomas Fremantle on 13 January 1797, while Eugenia noted that the Prince had grown very fat, passed much time with music masters and was proud of his voice with its three-octave range-although the irrepressible 4th Earl of Bristol once commented that 'this may be very fine braying, but it is intolerable singing'.24 While Augustus was at Naples, the Royal Neapolitan Club, 'composed of all the English noblemen and gentlemen who were travelling in Italy and resident some time at Naples',25 was formed under his auspices.  In March 1798 a Mr Livingston, a dour Scot, arrived from London to join the Prince's retinue, settle his finances and get him away from Naples. He had the advantage of considering Italy 'an imoral country, where nice feelings are not fashionable', and told the King that the Prince had 'constant dinners & suppers with very bad society' (6 Mar. 1798). By June 1798 Augustus and Livingston were in Vienna; Augustus stayed in Germany (where Lady Augusta, as 'Mrs Ford', briefly joined him in Berlin in 1799). His last visit to Italy was made in 1799. On 8 March he wrote to the Prince of Wales from Pisa saying that he was surrounded by 'the Remains of Roman Power', and reflecting that now England was 'the seat of Arts and Sciences'. He finally returned to England in May 1800. A daughter, Augusta Emma (later Lady Truro), was born in 1801, but he left Lady Augusta the same year.
Austen's adoptive parents sent him on his grand tour early in 1786 and he visited Switzerland, Dresden and Rome.1 His full-length portrait, with the Temple of Minerva Medica in the background, is believed to have been painted in Rome (Chawton). He was doubtless the 'Eduardo Austen' who came to Venice on 23 December 1789.2
John Austen was in Padua on 1 December 1704.1 'Austin' with John Eyles travelled from Venice to Rome, where they met the Duke of Shrewsbury in March,2 and in May Christian Cole passed on to them the compliments of Rosalba Carriera from Venice, where they intended to return.3 John Austen was again in Padua early in November 1706.4

Aylmer was in Padua on 22 November 1724 with Thomas Foley and William Moncrieff.1 On 1 March 1725 he had set out from Rome for Naples with Alan Brodrick.2 On 28 April 1725 Stosch reported that Aylmer and Mr Norris (probably his kinsman) were leaving Rome for England the next day (and were loyal to the King).3

"Ayscough travelled before 1770 for the sake of his health. His Letters from an Officer in the Guards to his friends in England: containing some accounts of France and Italy, was published in 1778; the letters have Roman numerals (as cited) and an address, but are undated (the last is signed G. L. Ayscough).  ""He arrived in Genoa in the company of 'Mrs B--d and her husband', as his travelling companions are always described (x). They travelled by felucca to Lerici and on to Pisa which he thought melancholy, a sad memory of its earlier glorious republican state; although the Court was there, he found no diversions (xii). After five weeks in Florence, he endured a snowy journey to Rome during which he was forced to walk, carrying his trunk for two miles. 'I felt a kind of enthusiastic delight at the first sight of Rome, but this was dampened by the recollection that this city, which was once inhabited by a nation of heroes and patriots, was now in the hands of the most effeminate and most superstitious people in the universe' (xvi). He described ciceroni as 'a set of scurvy abbati's to whom foreigners pay a settled salary, and give a constant place at their table, to be led about like bears by these learned gentlemen ... whose interest it is never to let him leave Rome while he can show him a broken pillar, a mutilated statue, or a single classical vestige of any kind whatever' (xvii). He was in Rome during the Carnival, but did not go on to Naples, as he had received orders to rejoin his regiment (xxiii). Ayscough, who was still travelling with Mrs B-d and her husband, went to Venice via Loreto, and then on to Milan where he was presented to the Duke of Modena (xxix). He returned to England from Turin."


Nicholas Bacon was in Padua on 28 October 1704 with his bear-leader James Hay.1 On 19 March 1705 a Mr Bacon was in Rome,2 and at Easter 1706 Nicholas Bacon and Hay were listed as lodging near the Strada Paolina in Rome.3







When his friend Charles, 7th Earl of Northampton, was appointed ambassador extraordinary to Venice in 1762, Richard Bagot accompanied him as secretary of the embassy. He told his father of his arrival in a letter of 20 October 1762.1 He may also have taken with him the young architect James Wyatt, whom he was later to employ at Blithfield (DBA). In April 1763 Bagot and Mordaunt attended the dying Countess of Northampton from Venice to Naples; he wrote to his father from Rome on 10 May, and the Countess died in Naples on the 18th, the day after their arrival.2 Bagot returned to Venice, but left soon after, probably with Northampton, who departed on 8 June. Bagot was in Geneva by 29 July. See also Northampton.
Sent to Naples to recover his health,1 'Mr Bagot' had passed through Capua on 24 November 1772.2 Patrick Home, who must have met him in Rome, thought him 'a decent good young man' but recorded that he died 'at Naples ye Winter 1773'.3
William Bagot travelled with the Rev. Thomas Townson, who had been to his Oxford College and was vicar of Blithfield, the Bagot home.1 They had spent a year in France before reaching Rome in January 1751.2 In Rome Bagot was one of the sponsors of Lord Charlemont's Academy for British artists (see John Parker, d. 1765) and he was included by Joshua Reynolds in his Parody of the School of Athens (NGI). He bought a Guercino, St Paul shaking the Viper from his hand, and his son later listed further Italian 17th-century paintings said to have been bought by his father in Rome. On 6 June 1752 James Russel wrote that Charlemont and Bagot were the only English left in Rome,3 and on 22 July Lascelles Iremonger wrote that Bagot had travelled to Siena via Perugia.4  Bagot remained all his life enamoured of Italy.5 Thomas Townson made purchases for him when he was in Rome with William Drake in 1768-9, and in 1773 Thomas Anson bequeathed to him Anthony Lefroy's collection of medals.
John Bagshaw succeeded George Henshawe as British consul at Genoa in November 17241 and on 30 December 1725 Richard Rawlinson was waiting 'on Mr Consul Bagshaw' at Genoa.2 He was not, apparently, a very imposing figure, Lord Essex describing him as 'horridly Stupid & Dull',3 but he stayed in office until his death in 1737, assisted in his final year by his nephew John Birtles, who was (vainly) hoping to succeed him.1  Further references to Bagshaw in Italy may or may not concern the consul. A John Bagshaw was a merchant at Leghorn in 1704;4 in 1708 a 'Sig.Bagsior' [possibly Bagshaw] was lodging in Rome,5 and Joseph Spence met a 'Bagshaw' in Florence sometime between August 1732 and April 1733.6



It appears that, as a child, George Hamilton with his older brother Thomas (aged about ten) and his sister Helen, went out to Naples in November 1732 to attend their dying father's bedside; see Lady Grisell Baillie. The brothers again visited Italy in 1740, as George Baillie and the 7th Earl of Haddington, accompanied by a tutor, the 'aimiable and slightly eccentric' Rev. John Williamson. Their grandmother, Lady Grisell Baillie, had characteristically prepared a careful itinerary based on her own travels in 1731-3.1 In Rome they met William Windham and his tutor Stillingfleet, which implies they were there in 1739 or early 1740; joined by Richard Aldworth, Robert Price and Benjamin Tate, they went on to form 'The Bloods', a very lively group, later known as 'The Common Room Set', in Geneva in 1740-1.2 Not surprisingly, by August 1741 the brothers had overspent their parental allowance.3 Horace Walpole later described Lord Haddington to Horace Mann as 'your old acquaintance', implying a visit to Florence.4 Haddington bought Ramsay's portrait of Samuel Torriano (painted in 1738; Mellerstain), possibly while he was abroad.
George Baillie's diary of a tour of Italy 1787-8 is at Mellerstain. He was one of the 'several young heirs of distinguished British families' whom Lord Gardenstone had seen at Naples by 1 March 1788, 'who by their sense and good manners do credit to themselves and honour to their country'.1  The Mellerstain MSS contain letters from George's brothers and sisters to their father from Florence and Genoa, including a grand tour of 1786-7.
At the age of sixty-six Lady Grisell Baillie, a remarkably capable woman who had distinguished herself as a girl in supporting her Presbyterian father in exile, travelled to Italy with a large family party of children and grand-children. The immediate reason was to seek a cure in the mild climate of Naples for her son-in-law Charles Hamilton, Lord Binning, but in this they were unsuccessful. For her husband, who was then sixty-eight, the voyage 'was both disagreeable and inconvenient to himself; but after he took the resolution, he did it with great cheerfulness'.1 Lady Grisell's Household Book (Baillie, Household Bk.) recorded their itinerary and their detailed accounts, from 'sasageses' and 'bad brandy' at Bologna to 'a capashin for siringing the ears' and the monthly house rent at Naples.2  They set out in May 1731, with their two daughters, Grisell (Lady Murray, 1693-1759, who had separated from her unstable husband, Sir Alexander Murray, in 1714) and Rachel (1696-1773, Lady Binning) with her invalid husband and her oldest daughter Grisell (b. 1719, who m. 1745 the 2nd Earl Stanhope). Travelling through Holland and France, they reached Turin on 27 October. They spent five nights there, visiting 'Palaces and other places'. At Milan they visited 'Palaces, Liberrary Hospitall'; 'seeing Palaces' recurs in their expenses at Parma, Reggio, Modena and Bologna. They reached Rome on 23 November and stayed a week sight-seeing, their accounts including payments to 'Sir Thomas Derhams servant' and 'Corsini the Pops Nephews servants'. On 5 December they finally arrived at Naples, the journey from Rome taking five days. They were to spend nearly eighteen months there (including the summer spent at Portici in 1732). They took a house at £8 per month and hired a coach and horses for the same rate. Lady Grisell, characteristically, at once set herself to learn Italian; she had none, but showed 'a singular quickness of capacity and apprehension' and within a short time she was conducting 'the whole business of her family with her Italian servants'.3 The family also studied music and had scores copied, Corelli being specially favoured. On 12 March 1732 8 shillings was paid 'For 4 picturs to George'; in May '2 Marbel Tables Fiore de persico from Don Michel Dicalabria' cost £11 4 shillings, and 'For the whole Marble Tables' £769 was paid on 24 May. Included in this list of purchases was 'sundry things by Mr Mann' and 'Mr Man's Tables'. This was the young Horace Mann who was then also in Naples for his health. For the summer of 1732, from May to November, they moved to Portici and when they returned to Naples they were joined by more of the family-two of Lord Binning's sons, George and Thomas, and his second daughter, Helen. They arrived in time to witness their father's death in Naples on 27 December. Joseph Spence then paid him a fine tribute; 'We have lost one of the prettiest gentlemen we had there, Lord Benning, a Scotch nobleman and a mighty genteel man. We were at the assembly at his house almost every evening when we were at Naples. He was there for a decayed constitution: the goodness of the air kept him alive for some time, but it could not cure him. He died not long after the earthquake, which, they say, always leaves a corruption in the air when violent'.4  Before setting off on a leisurely return journey accompanied by Horace Mann, the Baillies shipped home an assortment of forty-three marble 'tables', ham, parmesan cheese and macaroni. A month was spent in Rome and then in Florence they indulged in some patronage. On 25 April 9 guineas were paid for three portraits by Charles Martin of 'Mr Baillie, my Daughter Grisie and my grandchild Gris' (the first two at Mellerstain). Two guineas were paid for another portrait of 'my grandchild Helen'. There are further payments in Florence for 'copper Medles', '2 alabaster figurs', '2 Lyons of Marbel' and many books. They visited the Duomo, studied the Baptistery doors, and paid much attention to the work of Michelangelo, particularly at San Lorenzo. Continuing at a leisurely pace, at Bologna they visited the Palazzo Albergati with Lady Essex and paid £2 for a 'pictor of the Autom'. In Venice they visited the palaces and glass works and saw a gondolier's wedding; more books were acquired, including 'the lives of the Painters, and Plans of houses'. They dined in Padua with Sir Robert Brown and his brother Neil, the British consul at Venice, before proceeding to Spa. Elizeus Burges, the British resident at Venice, noted that the group of travellers, including Horace Mann, 'hope the Spaa-waters will do 'em more good than ye Air of Italy has done & design to be in England by the winter'.5 They had reached London in October. After her return Lady Grisell compiled a set of practical memoranda for her grandsons' grand tour which was made in 1740.


An Irishman commanding 450 Russians who landed at Manfredonia in 1799, entered Nola on 11 June, and took Naples. When the King returned with Acton on 10 July, the treaty with the French was signed by the Duke of Salandra, and Captains Troubridge and Baillie, on behalf of the Allies (H. Acton, Bourbons of Naples, 378-403).



John Baker had set up a new brewery in Leghorn in July 1782; in September 1785 the Grand Duke of Tuscany commended his collection of curiosities.1 He was possibly the merchant 'Baker' in whose house in Naples John Miller was murdered in 1784, see John Miller.



Early in October 1786, George Baldwin, his wife and his sister-in-law had stopped in Naples1 as they sailed for Alexandria, where he was taking up his post of consul-general in Egypt. The post was abolished in 1794, which Baldwin seems to have learned only in 1798. He abandoned his possessions and went to Patmos and Trieste. Following the battle of Marengo (June 1800) he came to Leghorn, where he escaped a republican uprising and sailed to Naples. One of his pamphlets, Osservazioni circa un nuovo specifico contra la peste, was published in Florence in 1800, and his Prima Musa Clio, written in bad Italian, appeared in London in 1802 (DNB).

Charles Baldwyn travelled with Burrell Massingberd and one servant 'who speaks the Languages and has been with a gentleman travelling these two years and parted with him at the Hague to us'.1 They came to Italy via the Netherlands and Germany, having been told by a Mr Downs [Downes?]that it was possible to see Italy in three months, but they were to take seven. They had intended to share a voiture across the Alps with Lord Herbert (later 9th Earl of Pembroke) who, however, changed his mind and went to Geneva. Baldwyn found it necessary 'to take some days of repose after passing the mountains, before one could get the thoughts of that unpleasant country out of one's head'. Baldwyn's letters tended to concentrate upon the incidence of English visitors, comparisons of Italian court life with that of St James's and, of necessity, the progress of the Spanish war; his references to virtù were brief (they were lengthier in his travel journal). He found Turin one of the most beautiful towns he had ever seen. He attended assemblies and had conversation with the Duke and Duchess of Savoy thanks to the British envoy, John Chetwynd. Milan was ugly, very large and full of trade, but he described the festivals and the Cathedral in detail. He admired the cloistered gardens of a convent near Pavia and found Genoa's setting impressive. 'Cittaes baying' (the use of the cicisbeo) was very diverting, but more important to him was the opportunity to visit the British fleet and transports at Vado. Lucca he described as 'this little Commonwealth ... that might easily be formed according to the rules of Utopia'. Leghorn was clean, neat and full of trade but with nothing stately or Antique. John Molesworth, the British envoy at Florence, sent his secretary to introduce them at the Tuscan Court, but the dullness of conversation had to be compensated by the 'pictures and Statues ... disposed of all about the town'. Baldwyn's only concern was with the movement of German troops in Tuscany which could make post horses scarce, 'as they did on our way to Lucca, and stopped us half a day'.  At Rome Baldwyn's days were filled 'with an Italian master and an Architect for two hours, and the Antiquary for three more till dinner', followed by a visit to a villa, the corso, and opera in the evening. He noticed that the Pope had had the marble columns in the Pantheon polished so that they 'now appear the noblest things I ever saw'. There were about twenty English visitors in Rome attending the Carnival, including Samuel Hill, from whom they accepted the offer of the lease on a house in Naples. This they found had views of Capri and Vesuvius. Charles Hooker and Mr Pelham, whom they had known in Rome, joined them in Naples and Baldwyn had a 'great deal of satisfaction' in the company of Sir John Shelley. He remarked that 'Ld. Shaftesbury who came hither almost dead, is now in a fair way of recovery, but I have not seen him. A few days will satisfy our curiosity here, and then we shall return to Rome to buy our things'. Back in Rome he paid particular attention to the sculpture, observing (like Addison before him) 'I believe the whole present Rome has not so many people in it as the antients had Statues'. He and Massingberd visited the Villa Ludovisi with Humphrey Chetham on 23 March 1712.2  Baldwyn acquired more prints than he had intended, and bought two sets by Dorigny, remarking that 'he sells them in England for three guineas - here they are but two'. He left Rome with regret; 'I own my curiosity fully satisfied at Rome, and I shall not care for any sights after it', he wrote.  On 23 April Baldwyn and Massingberd reached Venice, 'certainly the dullest place in the world except for some particular diversions which I do not taste', but the company of Mr Pelham, who had accompanied them from Rome, [Montague] Drake and Lord Herbert afforded some relief. On their return home Baldwyn and Massingberd travelled via Padua3 and Vicenza, and made a particularly enjoyable visit to Verona.
Before going to Italy, Balfour had spent some time in Switzerland and made a 'post-chaise tour' of Germany and France in 1788, the year he succeeded his grand-father to the family estates in Ireland. He returned home in 1790 and the following spring set out again on an extended Continental tour with his mother and two sisters and their friends. But while the rest of the party returned home from Nice, Blayney went on into Italy.1  He kept a perfunctory journal, 'Tour thro Italy, begun in the month of November 1791',2 describing his progress. At Parma he found many of Correggio's famous frescoes had 'suffered so much and are so high and in such dark places that it is difficult to see them', and at Modena he noted that, following the sale of the more important d'Este pictures to Stanislaus II of Poland [in 1745-6], 'all the good pictures have been taken from the Churches both of Modena and Reggio' to fill up the spaces. He found Bologna 'rich in good pictures and Churches', adding 'as I shall pass by Bologna in returning I will leave it now, to take the road to Florence', and at this point his journal ceases. In Rome in April he commissioned James Playfair to make designs for Townley Hall (one of which is dated 13 April 1792). He was in Venice late in May 1792 with a Mr Meade,3 and he was back in Ireland in October.


Lord Balgonie was in France accompanied by Dr Andrew Marshall, either his tutor or companion, who appears to have returned to Scotland when Balgonie went on to Italy in 1774.1 Balgonie arrived in Turin via Mont Cenis towards the end of the year. In Florence on 24 January 1775 he met the Young Pretender and his wife, both of whom he knew well, and Cardinal York, 'who is immensely rich, weak and a bigot'; he also mentioned the 'stinginess of the Grand Duke [Leopold]'. By the end of January he had reached Rome where he remained three months, the Abbé Grant describing him as 'extremely prudent, uncommonly accomplished, [and] universally beloved', and he was admitted to the Arcadian Society on 10 April.2 He spent May and June in Naples where he met Sir Roger Newdigate and his family3 and visited Pompeii and Paestum, but he carried back to Rome a strong impression of 'beggary and cruelty to animals'. In Rome Grant guided him around the festivities held in honour of the Archduke Maximilian, but Balgonie suffered from heat and fatigue. On 23 September he arrived in Venice, where he stayed with 'milord Plegol' [J.C. Pleydell?] and 'milord Satter'[?],4 and had two narrow escapes from drowning; in Padua he was nearly bitten by a scorpion in his bed.5 He had returned home by October 1776.
Captain of the Alexander, Ball served in the Mediterranean from May 1798. In October 1798 he wrote to Lady Hamilton thanking her for hospitality in Naples and asking to be remembered to his friends Lady Knight and Miss [Cornelia] Knight.1 In June 1799 he acted with Captain Troubridge as Nelson's messenger to Cardinal Ruffo in Naples.2
Robert Ball signed a letter from Leghorn merchants approving the choice of a new chaplain in 1710.1 In July 1722 Rawlinson met 'Mr Robert Ball F.R.S. an ingenious man in gardening and a friend of Sloan's [sic]' in Leghorn.2 Sir Hans Sloane received a letter from 'Robert Balle' dated Leghorn, 15 October 1728.3
Mother Black Bull' was seen with William Ottley at Rome in the summer of 1797, both 'mounted on fiery chargers, and accompanied by a man whom I took for a servant in livery. Mother Black rode an iron-grey mare, and what with the native similarity of her own countenance and the colour of her beast, she appeared at first sign like a female centaur' (Artaud letter bk.MSS, 27 Jun. 1797)



We have had a Lady Baltimore all this Carneval', wrote consul Hugh Broughton from Venice on 2 February 1714,1 and Thomas Coke met her there sometime in December-January 1713-14.2 In 1715 she married in Geneva Christopher Crowe, the British consul in Leghorn. Marriage to a Catholic-divorced-was not calculated to promote Crowe's career, and the couple spent only a year in Leghorn before Crowe was summoned home. At Leghorn in July 1716 Lady Baltimore had introduced Lord Harrold to 'the Conversationi of the place and dancing'.3
Mrs Delany, of whom Lord Baltimore was temporarily enamoured, recorded that he had travelled in Italy in 1729; he alleged he had then been near death.1  In September 1739 Lord Baltimore visited Frederick of Prussia with 'an accomplished young Italian named [Francesco] Algarotti', with whom he had been to Russia; by this time Baltimore, 'a very good-natured, weak, honest man', had travelled the Continent a great deal.2
Lord Baltimore spent the winter of 1762-3 in Italy, apparently for his health's sake, before proceeding to Asia.1 Winckelmann, his cicerone in Rome, was fascinated by this strange, jaded man, who inspected the Villa Borghese in ten minutes and 'cared for nothing except St Peter's and the Apollo Belvedere ... he has £30,000 a year which he does not know what to do with'; he persuaded Baltimore to commission from François Casanova (brother of the adventurer) a copy of Raphael's Transfiguration for the King (the copy was hung near the cartoons at Hampton Court).2 In February 1763 Baltimore visited Nathaniel Dance in Rome.3 On 4 May he embarked at Naples for Constantinople (see Francis Smith). He returned to London on 31 October 1764. In 1768 Lord Baltimore narrowly escaped conviction in London for the rape of a Quakeress, and he left England shortly afterwards. He appeared in Vienna with a harem of eight women4 and probably went next to Venice, where his Caelestes et Inferni was published in 1771, and where John Gray described him in March as 'incognito to every one, excepting his own seraglio of Italians, Greeks, Blacks, etc.'5 He went on to Naples, arriving in July or August 1771, and dying there on 14 September, owing, according to James Byres, 'to the bad Air and his own Obstinacy. He would take nothing. He has left seven unfortunate Nimphs, who have nothing to do now, but look out of their windows.'6 Baltimore's body was shipped back to England for burial, and on 17 March 1772 George Tierney wrote from Naples thanking God that all Lord Baltimore's women had left the place: 'The greatest service that could be done to him was to forget him, for he was a Strange worthless being.'7

On 19 April 1778 Bamford visited John Collet, British consul at Genoa, who was unable to assure him of employment, but agreed to arrange a passage for him and his family to Leghorn, where he would recommend him to the British consul, John Udny (Genoa cons. corr.MSS).
Miledi Bamfilde Monsieur Giorgio Bamfilde suo figlio, Monsieur Praus' [Price?], stayed nearly five months in Venice in 1790;1 her son George (later Baron Poltimore) was then aged four.
With the antiquary Stephen Weston, Charles Bampfylde arrived in Venice on 1 November 1773 (listed as 'Carlo Bauffilled, Tomaso Weston').1 They were in Naples on 11 January 1774,2 and returned to Venice on 10 May 1774 (listed as 'Tomaso Bumfield' and 'Roberto Weston').1 A 'Signor Benfild', probably Charles Bampfylde, was reported in Florence in the first week of May 1774 with [William?] Sandys, John Barber and Derval.3 Bampfylde commissioned a painting from Solomon Delane in Rome which he never bought (it was sold instead to Francis Basset in 1777).4 Ozias Humphry met Bampfylde in Rome, news which was received with interest by his sister in Honiton, as Bampfylde was about to become MP for Exeter.5
A portrait by Patch, inscribed in a later hand 'C.W. Bamfylde, Rome by Thomas Patch', has been provisionally identified (priv. coll.).1 Three Italian views by Bampfylde, the Bay of Naples, Lake Bolsena and the Ponte Lucano near Rome, are in the VAM, which may, or may not, have been made in Italy.
Henry Bankes first went to Italy in 1778 and his tour is described in his cursory diaries and in a number of letters addressed to his mother (Bankes MSS). He had been recommended by Sir John Dick, the former British consul at Leghorn, to John Strange, the British resident at Venice,1 where he had arrived by 8 January 1779. Verona he described as 'Exceedingly Odd - not pretty', and the Teatro Olympico at Vicenza as 'ugly loaded architecture'. In Rome he sat to Batoni; although Bankes did not consider his portraits 'equal to those of Reynolds' (14 Aug. 1779), he would sit, he told his mother (29 Sep.) 'as you have determined on it.' On 24 November he told her that the portrait would be finished 'tomorrow. It is certainly like me but without any sort of taste or good painting'. Batoni was making some alterations to it on 6 May 1780, but on 23 September Bankes announced it had been packed and sent to Ostend; 'I think it but a melancholy cold picture whose only merit is being simple and having nothing offensive' (Clark/Bowron 418; Kingston Lacy). Bankes made no mention of meeting John Soane or Robert Brettingham, whom he nevertheless must have encountered.2 Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) described Bankes in Rome as a young Englishman 'who has been for some months loosing his time here',3 but Father Thorpe gave him 'an excellent character', noting that Prince Abbondio Rezzonico (to whom Bankes had been recommended by a Dr Shepherd of Cambridge) 'has him every week at the Capitol'.4  Bankes arrived a second time in Rome in June 1782,5 allegedly to see the marchesa Massini, and he made the journey out in just nineteen days.6 From this visit there are letters from him to William Pitt written in July and September (Bankes MSS).  Bankes subsequently wrote A Civil and Constitutional History of Rome [1818].
William Bankes was painted at Rome by Batoni (Clark/Bowron 400; Raby) and was probably the Bankes, friend of Henry Swinburne, who arrived in Naples in February 1777 (Swinburne, Courts, 1:139).
Following his success both as student and exhibitor, Banks was sent to Rome for three years by the Royal Academy in 1772. He was then thirty-seven, 'a man of strict integrity and great simplicity of manners, and blunt even to rudeness'.1 He travelled with his wife, whose private income enabled him to stay a further four years in Rome, and their only child Lavinia (later Mrs Forster) was born in Rome, probably in 1775.2 They left London in July 1772 and arrived in Rome on 22 September. Though rather older than many other British artists in Rome, Banks appears to have mixed easily in their company; the painter Ozias Humphry and the young architect Edward Stevens and his wife became close friends, and he had high regard (which was reciprocated) for Henry Fuseli. Towards the end of their stay, in June 1778, Banks read the service at the funeral of Mrs William Pars, the painter's wife.3  Banks was well occupied in Rome. He wrote to Nollekens's father on 4 February 1774 describing how he had acquired some training in marble cutting ('in which the Italians beat us hollow') from 'Capitsoldi' [G.B. Capezzoli], and that year he worked on the marble relief of Alcyone discovering Ceyx (RA 1775) and modelled the relief of The Death of Germanicus for Thomas Coke of Norfolk (the marble now at Holkham). George Grenville commissioned a marble relief of Caractacus which was sent to England in December 1777 (now at Stowe) and the Bishop of Derry commissioned two heads (unidentified) and a figure of Cupid (which was eventually sold to Catherine of Russia). Banks also completed the plaster model of a Thetis (Soane Museum) for a marble relief (VAM). Sometime before 1778 (when he left Rome) the painter Robert Home had sat for a 'colossal [terracotta] bust' (RA 1781). In 1778 Banks sent for exhibition at the RA a marble bust of a lady and in May that year Thomas Jones sat for his bust in exchange for a picture.3 Banks's last work in Rome appears to have been a model for a monument to the Earl of Chatham (d. May 1778), which, however, arrived in England too late for a competition held in the autumn of 1779.  Despite such business, on 1 April 1778 Mrs Banks revealed to Humphry that all was not well: 'what unfortunate people we are, out of Commissions that were order'd in one season, to the amount of Nine hundred pounds ... that only two hundred should come to anything'. George Grenville had disputed payments for the Caractacus, the Bishop of Derry had characteristically reneged on his commissions, and there had also been 'some ill usage from a few other Gent.' On 4 November Mrs Banks was telling Humphry that there was little prospect for a sculptor in Rome: 'Gentlemen will not purchase anything larger than what they can carry on their fingers, or Snuff-boxes'. Banks became not only depressed but ill. For seven weeks in November-December 1778 he lay in bed with a fever, as Mrs Banks explained to Humphry on 5 January 1779, occasionally murmuring 'Oh, Mr Grenville, thou art principally the cause', and 'Oh, the Bishop, thou also hast a hand in it'. He was nursed by his wife and the painter James Durno, 'a friend in Need and a friend indeed', who shared rooms with them in the Stalla di Mignanelli, near the Piazza di Spagna in 1777 and 1778.4 In December 1778, at the height of Banks's fever, young Maria Hadfield arrived by invitation to stay with them. On his recovery, Banks was anxious to return home and in February 1779 Lady Catherine Beauclerk organised a raffle for the Alcyone, presumably to raise funds for the journey. It was won by Henry Swinburne, who gave it to Sir Thomas Gascoigne (it is now at Lotherton Hall).5 By April 1779 Banks was fit enough to go with his wife in a party of English artists, including Maria Hadfield, to spend a month in Naples.6 They spent little time in Rome on their return, departing on 18 May with Maria for England.7

A Jacobite, Barber lived in France and Italy for 'little more than three years'.1 With an 'impaired and shattered Constitution', he set out in 1722 for Naples on the advice of his physicians,2 and he was seen in Bologna early in June, on his way south.3 He was believed to be carrying money to the Pretender, an errand devised by the Pretender's natural sister, 'the Duchess of B[uckingham]'.2 Barber was in Naples by 26 June, when it was reported that he had 'come here to enjoy this air for the benefits of his health. Tis said his principles were allws. inclined for the interest of the Pretender'.4 From Naples he was in touch with the Pretender under the alias of Alderman Brown.5 On 13 May 1724 Barber was in Padua under his own name.6 When he returned to England, owing to the 'State of his Affairs at Home', he was arrested at Dover,1 but he survived to become a Lord Mayor of London. He was said to have a modest collection of pictures, with 'valuable and curious' pieces.1
On 2 November 1771 a 'Jan Barher' was listed in Florence.1 A 'J. Barber' was in Rome in 1773 when he wrote to the print collector Charles Rogers concerning the availability of Volpato engravings.2 On 7 May 1774 'Lord Gohn Barberz' was listed in Florence with Bampfylde, [William?] Sandys and Derval.1 A vase from the collection of 'Sigr. Cavaliere Giovanni Barber' was engraved by Piranesi in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778].3 In the sale of John Barber of Brentford in 1807 (Christie's, 26 Jun.) there was a View in Italy by Jacob More, 'purchased by him above forty years ago in Italy'4 (but More did not reach Rome until early in 1774).

B. Barckley met George Sinclair of Ulbster during the latter's visit to Turin in April 1738. 'Barckley came to see us at supper the night before - returned the comical visit today, as also to Williams and Anderson at the Academy' (23 Apr.); while Sinclair was paying him a farewell visit (26 Apr.) Barckley showed him the King of Sardinia's hunting uniform 'which is red with silver and gold lace on the Coat, waistcoat blew with Silver lace - the sleve of ye Coat blew' (Sinclair jnl.MSS).

With Patrick Cowper, another Protestant clergyman, Barclay was summoned to the Jacobite court in Italy in July 1717, see Cowper. Barclay travelled with a companion, John Graeme, and was in Italy by 7 December 1717 and in Rome on 1 January 1718.1 In 1719 Lord Forbes of Pitsligo asked Colonel William Clephane and Dr Barclay to witness the destruction of letters he had received from the Pretender, but they dissuaded him.2 In 1721 Lord Rialton described a Protestant service at the Pretender's palace conducted by 'Berkley and Cooper', who had assured him that the Pretender was 'most Averse to Disputes and Distinctions of Religion'.3 On 24 April 1721 Barclay officiated at the marriage of Mr Campbell to 'the sister of Mrs Trotter' and on 4 September 1724 Rawlinson noted that Barclay, 'one of the Church of Scotland Chaplain here in the Chevalieres court', publicly performed the baptism of Clementina, daughter of the 5th Earl of Southesk, thereby causing some offence.4 Stosch, who in 1723 had reported Barclay's presence in the entourage of the Pretender, wrote on 12 September 1726 that the Pretender had been forced to make Barclay and Cowper, his Anglican clergymen, leave Rome.5 Cowper died soon after in Florence, but Barclay appears to have stayed there some months before embarking at Leghorn for Toulon in May 1727.6
Mrs Barclay wrote to her brother-in-law, Sir Hew Dalrymple, from Rome on 30 April 1746, saying her husband was suffering from an infection caught on their journey, but they hoped soon to go to Naples. In the event Dr Barclay died before 7 May, and his wife had died by 23 July.1 They were doubtless the 'Sig.Robert Barcher - Milord Ingl.- 35' and 'Giacomina, Moglie - 30' living in the Vicolo di Bernini at Easter 1746.2





He was in Italy on at least two occasions, but only once before 1800. In December 1799, en route for Constantinople, he called at Palermo,1 where he met Sir William and Lady Hamilton and Lord Nelson, who (referring to Barker's Battle of the Nile exhibited in London in 1799) told him 'he was indebted to me for keeping up the fame of his victory in the Battle of the Nile for a year longer than it would otherwise have lasted in the public estimation'.2

Ralph Barker of London and his Irish companion, Captain Patrick Browne, were taken round Rome during April and May 1723 by Richard Rawlinson. On 10 April they visited St Peter's and two days later the Palazzo Colonna. On their return from Naples, Rawlinson took them to the Collegium Romanun on 13 May; two days later they set out for Florence (Rawlinson jnl.MSS).
Thomas Barker went to Italy from Bath in 1790, accompanied by the young engraver John Hibbert, both being sponsored by Charles Spackman, the Bath coach builder who was Barker's patron.1 In a coach Spackman had provided, they went from Leghorn to Florence, where in 1791 they obtained permission, through Francesco Gianfigliazzi, to copy in the Uffizi.2 After a few months Barker went on to Rome. John Flaxman became a particular friend, and they were both members of the Society of English Art Students, a dining club which met on the first Saturday of the month. 'Hibberts' and 'Hibbert' is mentioned in Mrs Flaxman's diary in Rome on 24 October 1791 and 2 March 17933 and 'Hebbert' the engraver was listed in Rome as living in the Strada Croce (Rome List 1793).  Barker filled sketchbooks on his visits to churches and galleries; he also drew from nature, persisting 'in going out to sketch in the Campania in the fierce heat of the mid-day sun, until he was disabled by a 'coup de soleil''. Two sketchbooks of 1792 (BMPL) also contain drawings made in Naples, Pompeii and Paestum. Barker sent finished paintings to Spackman, including a Moonlight with Banditti (exhibited RA 1791) and a stylish Self-portrait with a view of Tivoli on his easel (Holburne of Menstrie Museum, Bath); The Bandits (Bristol) is signed and dated Rome 1793. By December 1793 Barker had returned to Bath, recalled by his patron Spackman, whose finances had begun to crumble.
Barker wrote to his brother-in-law, Thomas Dunnage, from Leghorn on 2 December 1791 saying he was hoping to return to Smyrna 'in about six weeks or two months', depending on his [second] wife's confinement, and hoped to travel with 'Capt. Baker whom you recommend'.1 His daughter Grace, who had just sailed out from Falmouth, as well as his wife were with him. In 1815 Barker intended to make over the Smyrna business to one of his sons and to retire to Leghorn,2 but he died at Smyrna.
Barker was in Rome in March 1763, described as one of the earliest members of the Arcadian Society. 'There has been within these two or three days', wrote Daniel Crespin on 11 March 1763, 'a fashion started for most of the British Travellers to become Arcadian Pastors, I got the first Patents or Diplomas for Lord Warkworth, [Jonathan] Lipyeatt, & Barker; I have sent since for Eleven or Twelve others, and the great amusement is, using their Pastoral Name, & Disputing about the value of their Arcadian Province, with Schemes for Croisades, to rescue the Land out of the Hands of the Turk.'1 He was probably the 'Wiliame Barchar' in Venice from 13 May to 14 June 1763.2

With his older brother, Lewis, and governor C. Thomson, Hugh Barlow had arrived in Rome by 22 December 1725, in time to see the ceremony of the closing of the Holy Door. His party was closely observed by Stosch.1 By 26 January Hugh had dined several times with Cardinal Gualterio. Early in June his party met James Hay, the Pretender's surgeon, and Stosch then suspected that Thomson was 'opineâtrement jacobite' and a malign influence. Later in June the Barlows went to Albano, where the Pretender was staying; on the 29th 'Mr Barlow' returned to Rome with the Pretender and Lord Bulkeley. The Barlows left Rome for Naples in March 1727 and apparently remained there a year. In March 1728 they joined Lord Lovelace and John King on an expedition on board an English merchant vessel to Sicily and Malta. In July they passed through Rome on their way home, and on 22 August 1728 they were in Padua.2



At Easter 1701 Barnard was staying in the Strada Felice at Rome;1 on 23 August 1701 Robert Sharpe in Rome 'discoursed with My Lord Bernard'.2 By 29 September Barnard had arrived in Florence, where he lent the Duke of Shrewsbury a latin manuscript by Algernon Percy concerning Cromwell, Gustavus Adolphus and Sir Henry Vane the younger.3
In July 1768 Frederick Barnard was given an annual allowance of £2,000 and sent to the Continent to acquire books for the Royal Library at Windsor. By December 1771 he had visited Paris, Vienna, Rome, Strasbourg, Dresden, Berlin, Amsterdam, Brussels and Spa.1 He was probably the 'Barnard' listed at Florence on 4 November 1769 with Boscawen and 'Mentiven'[?].2
On leaving Oxford in 1784, Lord Barnard went abroad for three years. After spending time in France and Geneva (where he was living with an actress in August 1785) he spent the winter of 1785-6 in Italy.1 By 18 January 1786 he was in Rome;2 he visited Cardinal de Bernis on 24 January3 and his portrait was painted. 'Tho' I hope eer long to be Blessed wh seeing the Original; I nevertheless feel myself impatient fr the Arrival of the Picture we were promised shd come in Novbr from Rome', wrote his mother, Lady Darlington, on 24 October 1786. From Rome Lord Barnard travelled to Naples and then went back to Florence, where his parents directed their letter of 22 February 1786. He then visited Venice, and by 21 March his parents were writing to him at Vienna.
Captain Barnard and John, Lord Hervey, accompanied Captain David Sutherland on his ship from Naples to Salerno at the end of September 1787.1 On 28 September the King of Naples inspected the ship; Barnard may have accompanied Sutherland on his visit to Paestum on 30 September and on 2 October Lord Hervey left Sutherland, 'off Salerno', presumably taking Barnard with him.1 He was probably the 'Capitano Bernard' who arrived in Venice on 20 May 1789 with Lady Hervey.2
A widower, Barne was in Italy during the summer of 1749, when Horace Mann described him as having 'no time to see anybody. He set out from England six weeks ago, has been all over France and great part of Italy, and designs to make the tour of the rest and all Germany, and be in England in six weeks more. The next summer he intends to spend three months more in seeing the rest of Europe' (Wal.Corr., 20:78-9).
He travelled in Europe with a companion, S. Chase, between 1769 and 1771 and their itinerary is given in the Barne letters MSS (and ASV IS 759).



James Boswell met Colonel Barré, an outspoken politician, in Florence in August 1765.1 On 17 August Horace Mann said Barré was 'hastening homewards ...',2 his haste doubtless allied to his hope for position in Rockingham's new ministry; but he declined the joint vice-treasurership of Ireland, offered him on 29 August.3 His portrait, attributed to Gavin Hamilton, was sold in 1986 (Christie's, 18 Apr.).

Barrett travelled with his wife and his sister-in-law, Caroline Pratt (afterwards Baroness of Munster). They left England shortly after the death of the Barretts' only child, Anne Barbara, in March 1749, partly to distract them from their loss and partly for Thomas Barrett's health (he was a hypochondriac according to Horace Walpole). Their itinerary and Barrett's observations are contained in his letters addressed to his wife's brother-in-law, Nicholas Hardinge.1 They reached Genoa in the summer of 1749 and stayed for two weeks before continuing by sea to Viareggio. They visited Leghorn, Lucca and Pisa, where Barrett described the 'Gothick Cloister' round the Campo Santo 'painted by the best Masters of those old times when ye art of Limning began to revive again & tis extreemly curious to observe the Stile of Painting and their Strange imaginations, and ye mixture of good things & bad'. He was exceptionally interested in the gothic. They had arrived in Florence by the last week of July, bringing a letter of introduction from John Chute to Horace Mann, who settled them in a house and held a conversazione in their honour. In August Mann accompanied them to the baths of Pisa, which Barrett had found beneficial; Mann was teaching Mrs Barrett ('vastly agreeable') and her sister Italian 'a very innocent and agreeable employment', but he wished he could persuade Mr Barrett 'that he is not so ill as he thinks'.2 In Florence Barrett sent back to England his two Swiss servants who made 'unjust and Extravagant claims' upon him, and he made friends with the Frescobaldi family (to whom he revealed their ancestor's connection with Thomas Cromwell). His letters dwell on the paintings, buildings, and sculpture; the buildings on the Ponte Vecchio 'are by much too low & too narrow. Ye Bridge being a very old one, & tis indeed a thousand pity's that all ye Houses on it are not pulled down'; he was 'quite transported' by the Tribuna, in which the Raphael St John in the Wilderness disappointed and the Venus de Medici exceeded his expectations. He was particularly impressed with Giambologna's Apennino at Pratolino, 'ye boldest and noblest design I ever saw'.  The Barretts remained in Tuscany until November 1749, when they set out for Rome and Naples; they visited Siena on their way and spent a night at an inn at Radicofani, which they found so foreboding that they locked their doors 'with certain Bolts & Skrews we carried from England for that purpose'. They reached Naples by the new year (1750) and remained until March. They then spent some six weeks in Rome viewing the antiquities, before setting out on 23 April to Venice for Ascension.3 In June or July they returned to Florence but, perhaps because of his attentions to Mrs Barrett, their relationship with Mann cooled through the summer.4 From Florence, Barrett visited Vallombrosa, more to satisfy his correspondent Hardinge's curiosity than his own; they found a 'fairy Country w'ch is quite seperated from ye rest of ye World'. In the same letter Barrett wrote from Florence (12 Sep. 1750) of his plans for the following months: 'My present scheme is to go to Rome ye end of next month & there to pass ye winter; in ye spring I meditate my [2nd] excursion to Naples and after passing a fortnight or three weeks there shall return back to Rome to pack up my things & make ye best of my way thro' Germany to ye Spaw & so come to England in ye Autumn [1751]'. Edward Thomas mentioned attending Mrs Barrett's conversazioni in January 1751.5 It was presumably during the winter of 1750-1 that each sat to Batoni, who also painted a touching portrait of them watching over their deceased daughter, her features taken from a portrait by Hudson (Clark/Bowron 133, 133A, B; priv. colls.). Pancrazi dedicated a plate in his Antichita Siciliane [1751-2], to 'Tomaso Lennard Barrett', perhaps indicating that Barrett had visited Sicily from Naples. He may also have been the 'Mr. Barret' in Reynolds's Parody of the School of Athens, painted in Rome in 1751 (NGI).6

According to his brother, Lord Barrington went to Geneva at the age of eighteen and 'after a short residence there, made what is called the grand tour'.1 By December 1736 he had been a month in Florence with Lord Raymond,2 and later that month he was in Rome.3 At Easter 1737 he was listed at Rome living at the 'Casa dei Gesuiti', near the Piazza di Spagna, with 'Hal' (probably John Hall of Dunglass),4 but by March he was in Florence, where during the Carnival he took part in a masque with Lord Middlesex and Lord Raymond, and the three apparently went on to produce an opera at Lucca (see Middlesex). Barrington arrived in Venice in the third week of May,5 but did not return to England until February 1738.
In 1771 Lord Arundell, having noticed one of Barron's portraits at the RA with an address 'at Rome', asked Father Thorpe in Rome who the artist was; Thorpe had no idea.1 Barron was in Lisbon in April 1772, when the British envoy Robert Walpole gave him a letter of introduction (dated 28 April 1772) to William Hamilton in Naples, describing him as 'a Scholar of Sir Joshua Reynolds for Painting and of Giardini for Musick ... Painting is his profession, and Musick is his Amusement'.2  In August and September 1772 Barron was copying in the Uffizi in Florence; at Horace Mann's request he was permitted to copy self-portraits and Raphael's St John in the Desert,3 but he was unable to copy Titian's Venus.4 Hayward gave the date of Barron's arrival in Rome as October 1772,5 and on 31 July 1773 Thomas Banks wrote that he had come 'at the beginning of the season': his great merit 'in the portrait way' and 'good correspondence' with society had led to so many commissions 'as proved no small mortification to [Wickstead]'; 'Barron is a young man of very conspicuous merit, has the most of Sir Joshua's fine manner of any of his pupils, and ... when he returns to England, he will cut a great figure in his way'.6 In 1774 Barron had so pleased the Duke of Cumberland 'with the fiddle' that the Duke 'honoured his abilities as a painter',7 but the picture is now unlocated. Barron was again in Rome in October 1775 and may have gone to Naples that winter. In 1776 Barron was listed in Rome (with 'Pigionanti'[?]) in the Piazza di Spagna;8 in May 1777 he was in Genoa and Turin giving Northcote an introduction to Jacob More in Rome.9 Barron exhibited two portraits at the RA in 1778, giving his address as 'Rome'. On 20 June 1778 John Collet, the British consul at Genoa, mentioned that he had staying with him 'a Mr Barron, a very ingenious Artist & a most amiable young man.'10 The date of Barron's return to London is not known; he next exhibited at the RA in 1782 from King Street, London.


With the support of Edmund Burke, Barry travelled to Italy, with Rome as his primary destination, in order to complete his education as a painter. He spent ten months in Paris before setting off through Burgundy and the Savoy to enter Italy via Mont Cenis. He arrived in Rome shortly after his twenty-fifth birthday. 'I am forming myself for a history painter', he was to explain on 8 April 1769; 'my studies have been so directed as to carry me as safely as I can through a little path, where, nothwithstanding the great number of painters in the world, I am not likely to be jostled down by too much company; and ... the prosecution of my plan depends more on the antique than it does on any thing else'.1 In November 1769 he wrote to his Irish mentor, Dr Joseph Fenn Sleigh, 'really and indeed I never before experienced any thing like that ardor, and I know not how to call it, that state of mind one gets on studying the antique.-A fairy land it is, in which one is apt to imagine he can gather treasures, which neither Raffael nor Michel Angelo were possessed of'.2 Like Reynolds before him, Barry did not attach himself to a particular studio but rather undertook a course of private study. By day he examined and copied the works of the classical canon and the old masters, while in the evenings he sketched from the nude figure, probably at the French Academy or the Accademia del Nudo. Barry made a number of friends in the international community of artists then in Rome. He was particularly close to the Runciman brothers and to the sculptors James Paine junior and Nollekens; he was also friendly with the French painters L.-G. Blanchet, who painted his portrait, and Dominique Lefevre, and on leaving Rome he travelled with the Savoyard J.-F. Rigaud. Barry, though, was acutely aware of the tensions in this small community of ambitious young men competing for limited resources, writing on 26 February 1768; 'We are in number about thirty students, English, Scotch, and Irish; and as there is in our art every thing to set the passions of men afloat, all desiring consequence and superiority; it is no wonder if distrust, concealed hatred, and ungenerous attempts, are perhaps oftener experienced, than friendship, dignity of mind, or open square conduct'.3 With his paranoia and his exalted self-importance, he soon quarrelled with the power brokers such as Thomas Jenkins and James Byres, as he explained in a letter of 23 May 1767: ''Tis pity to see our gentlemen, who come out of England with the best intentions, and with a national spirit, so duped, and made even instruments of dissension 'twixt the artists here. The antiquary and dealer are each provided with his own set of puffers; and, in return, whatever gentleman falls into his hands, is taught to believe that, next to the old pictures and statues which they deal in, these are the only people for modern work, either here or at home'.4 Spending his time studying Italy's artistic treasures and with no patronage available, Barry had little opportunity or incentive to create his own paintings. The sole history painting he completed in Rome was The Temptation of Adam (NGI), which he sent for exhibition at the RA in 1771. A critic then complained that 'The only objection to this piece is, an insufficiency of drapery; a fault common to most young painters, immediately after the tour of Italy, on account of the difference of climate'.5 He painted one portrait, the Self-Portrait with Paine and Lefevre (NPG), a complex, idealised image of youthful genius in which Barry paints his two friends who, in turn, are painting the Torso Belvedere (a second portrait of Nollekens [YCBA] is doubtfully attributed to Barry). On his return to London from Rome, his longest stop was in Bologna, where he was elected to the Accademia Clementina, executing as his diploma piece Philoctetes on the Island of Lemnos-the first painting of this classical subject since antiquity. Toward the end of his stay, on 8 September 1770, Barry offered the opinion that 'Seeing and examining have brought me into that state of mind, that if any man was hardy enough to assert that the study of the antique [for form and composition] and Titian alone [for colouring] (exclusive of all other painters) was the surest and most likely method of producing perfection, I would not, I could not contradict him'.6 Yet it was Raphael and Michelangelo who proved the most enduring influence on his art.
An enthusiastic collector of pictures and antiquities and a somewhat unpredictable character, Barry set out for Italy late in 1771. He was to have gone with his friend the antiquary Charles Townley who was, however, delayed through illness.1 In Rome Barry met Thomas Jenkins who at once set about selling him pictures and antiquities (Barry eventually called him 'Don Tomasso'); he also sat for his portrait (unattributed; Sotheby's, 16 Nov. 1988), and his brawling servants were fined and imprisoned. In May 1772 Townley caught up with him in Naples. They visited Herculaneum and Pompeii, but Barry stayed in Naples when Townley set out for Puglia and Calabria. In September Barry caused 'great offense by not yielding his Rooms to the Prince [of Francavilla].'2 In October Barry and Townley visited Sicily, where they spent two months and bought large quantities of Greek and Sicilian medals. They returned to Naples on 27 December and Townley left for Rome at the end of January 1773. Barry wrote to him from Naples describing his hectic social life and his successes with the ladies. On 6 March he was passing through Capua on his return to Rome,3 where he bought from Jenkins the equestrian Paris, excavated, and heavily restored, by Gavin Hamilton. On 1 June 1773, with Lord Winchilsea, Thomas Dashwood, Dr Alexander Drummond and James Clark, Barry sailed from Naples for Greece, Constantinople, and Egypt. When he returned to Italy in March 1775 (Townley had then gone), Barry bought paintings on a lavish scale but with little discernment; they included a Tintoretto Holy Family for £1,000 and a Bassano Last Supper for £750. Father Thorpe wrote that Barry had 'again spent £12000 on virtu notwithstanding his other purchases made for eight thousand were judged to be not worth much more than the carriage to England' and Patrick Home described him as 'Smith-Barry - a great Virtu Man. bought pictures from & cheated by Jenkins'.4 His purchases of antiquities included five statues from the Villa Mattei, the 'Jenkins Vase' bought for £500 (now NMW) and the Antinous found at Ostia in 1775, bought from Gavin Hamilton for £1000 (Sotheby's, 9 Dec. 1974). Since bills drawn on his father's bank were now refused on paternal instruction, he was forced to borrow £3,000 from Jenkins who had already financed most of Barry's purchases in this final year. Barry arrived in Florence on 1 July 1775,5 and had returned to England by the summer of 1776, via Dresden and Paris. Barry was back in Italy in 1779. He was in Florence in May when he was seen at Horace Mann's,6 and later that month he passed through Rome on his way to Naples. On 13 September at Posillipo he met Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke), who complained that Barry had inflated the prices of rooms in Vietri.7 Gavin Hamilton told Townley that during this visit Barry became a 'feeble lover' and had avoided Jenkins with whom his relations were understandably strained; some of the pictures he had previously purchased from Jenkins were returned, partially to help settle his debt, but partly in protest at alleged exploitation. Hamilton reported that Barry made few purchases, except in medals, but he sat to Angelica Kauffman in Rome for a portrait dated 1780 (priv. coll.) and Jacob More completed two pictures for him in 1787.8  In 1781 Barry bought from Hamilton a seated Zeus from the Villa d'Este for £600 (instead of the rumoured £1,000; it had been exported from Rome without a licence).9 This was the last antiquity he acquired (it is now in the J. Paul Getty Museum, Malibu). Barry came into considerable wealth in 1784, and his later years were spent in relative seclusion on the Isle of Fota.10 At Marbury Hall, which was bequeathed to him by an uncle in 1787, there were in 1814 325 pictures (including views of Naples by Fabris, and several copies by 'Clarke', probably James Clark, the antiquary) and over 60 antiquities (including 21 statues and 19 busts); of these, the last sales took place in 1972 (Sotheby's, 12 Jul.; pictures), and 1987 (Christies, 10 Jul.; antiquities).

Mrs Barry was lent a house in Leghorn between March and June 1794 by N. Brooke1 and Sarah Bentham met Mrs and Miss Barry at Leghorn at the end of March 1794.2 It is not clear whether she had previously been in Italy, although her Memoirs of Maria, a Persian Slave, which had been published anonymously in London in 1790, suggests she may have been. It contains a dedication to Lady St George, and in the preface Mrs Barry described herself as the 'editor' of the memoirs obtained from Maria herself. Lady St George had first learned in Italy of Maria's story 'by the daughter of the late Mr.D[ucours?] who lived in Italy', and had asked Mrs Barry to discover more. Mrs Barry had over two hundred subscribers, mainly from the British merchant communities in Leghorn, Genoa and Naples, whose names are listed in the book.
Barry was in Rome at the beginning of June 1764. William Patoun introduced him to James Martin and they dined with Chambers and Lord Exeter at John Apthorp's on 3 June.1 He was possibly the 'Monsieur de Berry' who with Apthorp had passed through Capua on 7 March 1764, indicating a visit to Naples.2 On 1 July Barry, with James Martin, 'looked over the three Volumes of the Curiositys of Herculaneum [Le Antichità di Ercolano, 8 vols., 1757- 92] finely engraved & published (with Descriptions of them) by the King of Naples who sometimes gives them to Persons of Distinction but does not permit any one to sell them'. On 6 July Martin and Barry, with the antiquary James Byres, visited Robert Crone's studio, and on 8 July they drew Domenichino's angels in one of the chapels in S.Silvestre. Barry arrived in Bologna on 21 July;3 he met Martin again on 8 August and on the 18th they visited la Corrilla, the Poetess, 'a bel Esprit of the first Order & particularly clever for Improvisos'. On 1 September they travelled to Modena and went on to Parma, where Martin stayed for four days before returning alone to Bologna.

Lord Barrymore was at the Turin Academy in 1764 with his governor, Captain Dobson.1 Gibbon met him there at the end of April, and John Holroyd in July-August.2 It is not certain when he returned to England, but he married in London on 16 April 1767. 'If you but knew all the bad stories in this town [Turin] about that young man,' the youthful Lord Kildare told his mother, 'you'd pity his good mother, here they say 'qu'il est le premier des mauvais sujets sans esprit'. I hardly ever mention him for that reason.'3



Basil was in Padua with his companion William Smith on 9 December 1726;1 on 3 May 1727 Stosch wrote they had left Rome for England, 'their conduct correct'.2
Giacomo Bessier', an English Protestant age 19, was residing with Richard Dalton and Thomas Patch in the Palazzo Zuccari in Rome at Easter 1750.1 While in Rome Basire drew in chalk after Raphael and he may also have copied Guercino (Boydell published 7 plates by Basire after works by Guercino in 1765).
Francis Bassett first went to Italy with the Rev. William Sandys. In Rome he bought a painting from Delane (originally painted for Charles Bampfylde) and commissioned another from Jacob More.1 He may also have been in contact with Piranesi, who dedicated a plate to him in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778] (showing a tripod found by Gavin Hamilton in 1775). In May 1778 Basset appears to have stood proxy for Lord Carmarthen at the christening of Lord Cowper's second child in Florence.2 He was presumably the 'Tomaso Bassette' who arrived in Venice with Sandys on 26 May 17783 and he was certainly back in England later that year. He returned to Italy in 1788, by which time he had been made a Baronet. In Venice on 17 October 1788 Charles Abbot recorded meeting 'Sr. F. Basset & 2 Ladies of his Family',4 presumably his wife and their only child, Frances, then aged seven. Basset's pictures, dispersed in two sales at Christie's in 1824 (8/9 May) and 1920 (9 Jan.), included several Italian views by Robert Freebairn, Delane and More, Gavin Hamilton's Death of Lucretia, and some Italian old masters. Northcote said Basset owned copies by Nocci of Raphael's paintings in the Stanze, made for the engraver Volpato.5

Bateman went to Leghorn c.1713 and built up a thriving merchant practice. In 1736 he let his house in Venezia Nuova to Godfrey Chamberlain; in 1743 he purchased another house in the Via Borra, also in Venezia Nuova and his family owned the Villa Perti between Via Calzabigi and Viale Petrarca.1 He was probably the husband of the Mrs Bateman whom Richard Rawlinson met in Leghorn on 5 July 1722.2 Bateman died in Leghorn and was buried in the Protestant cemetery, an inscription on his gravestone saying he had practised there about thirty years.3 A James Bateman, merchant, recorded at Leghorn in 1704, was probably a relation.4
A son of the rich Bateman', William was at Venice for the Carnival in January 1718.1 He was then in Padua in February2 and Rome in June and August 1718.3 He is said to have formed a great collection of paintings and statues on his travels,4 but his fine 'Mercury of Grecian workmanship bought from Naples'5 was bought for him after he had returned home by Alexander Gordon.

A particular friend of the painters Thomas Jones and J.H. Mortimer, Dr Bates travelled to Italy in 1787 with his daughter Lydia (c.1772-1850), an amateur artist who had made etchings after Mortimer's works. 'Dr Bates and his charming little girl' left Lyons on 12 October with John Flaxman and his wife, and they were all together in Florence on 8 November.1 In December (apparently before the Flaxmans) they were in Rome and by March 1788 Lydia was studying painting while her father had 'got into high practice among the English gentry'.2 In August 1788 they were living close by the Flaxmans in the Piazza Mignanelli,3 and in October T.C. Porter breakfasted with Bates and Mr Gordon, 'a leading merchant'.4 By July 1790 Bates and his daughter were 'on the road home' from Rome,5 having both been made Honorary members of the Accademia Clementina in Bologna on 14 June.6  In April 1791 John Flaxman told his parents that Dr Bates had been a difficult neighbour (it was also said that Lydia Bates and Flaxman had had an unsatisfactory affair in Rome).7 Flaxman wrote that the doctor had 'behaved himself in such a manner here [in Rome] that when he went away he had not one friend, those who were most intimate with him were most embroiled by his caprice and vanity & everyone was glad when he was gone'; Mrs Flaxman added that she neither expected nor desired to hear from Lydia again.8
In November 1706 Arundel and Bates of Leghorn were acting as agents for Laurenzo Magnolfi (camerero of the Grand Duke of Tuscany), and for Sir John Perceval in Florence in November 1707.1 William Bates signed a merchants' letter approving the choice of a new chaplain at Leghorn in 17102 and 'Messrs Bates, Campion and Mitchel' were acting as agents at Leghorn in 1718.3

With Sir John Rawdon and others, he met Lady Pomfret in Siena on 24 August 1739; he had left on 8 October.1 Spence met him in Turin the following year.2
Henrietta, Lady Bath, arrived in Venice from Verona on 22 January 1795 with her husband, General Sir James Murray, now styled 'Pulteney Nobile Inglese', and a Lady Sutton. They all left for Florence on 7 February.1 On 19 April 1795 Emma Hamilton wrote from Caserta 'I have had Lady Bath with me here 2 days, I carried her to the Queen. She is very shy, but she took a great fancy to me as I put her at her ease and did the honners of a ball for her, that she gave at Naples. She envited all the Neapolitan ladies of the first distinction, and I was to present them, and she took a nervous fit and wou'd not come out of her room for 3 hours. At last I got her out, and brought her in to the room between me and Lady Berwick; and I carried the ladies, who were dancing, one by one to her in a corner, and she took such a liking that we are very great friends. Sir James seems a worthy good man. But Sir William [Hamilton] says he wou'd not have her with all her money. However, I like her, for I think she as a great deal of good about her'.2 She returned to Venice still with her husband and Lady Sutton on 13 May and they left together for Padua on 4 July.3


With his tutor, Dr James Hay (d. 1746), Bathurst arrived in Italy via the Brenner pass, where on 25 September 1711 they met John Bellings 'heading for Venice'.1 On 2 October they were in Padua,2 and by 6 February they were in Rome for the Carnival.3 They were shown round by the antiquary Ficoroni and were noticed in Rome on 6 April.4 On 2 July Bathurst asked Burrell Massingberd in England 'if you would send me some small account how matters goe, that I may be able to withstand these Gentlemen [Jacobites] who may else at length persuade me that they are in ye right, you will confirm ye just opinion I always had of your different notions'.5 Bathurst was one of few Englishmen in Rome in August.6
He had met Charles Wyndham (later 2nd Earl of Egremont) in Paris and they had travelled together to Lyons, but Bathurst then went on his own to Turin.1 He was in Florence with Charles Hanbury Williams on 25 November 1729,2 and Stosch reported his arrival in Rome with Williams and Henry Legge on 8 December. Early in the new year, Stosch described the Pretender's annoyance at the way Williams and Bathurst imitated his public style.3 In March Wyndham said that after Easter he planned to travel part of the way home with Bathurst, but in April he no longer mentions Bathurst; he promised his father he had avoided 'the Chevalier' [the Pretender] and his court.4 When Bathurst left Rome on 7 May with Lady Lechmere, her (second) husband Thomas Robinson and his sister, Stosch noted that he 'always protested himself a firm friend of the King's but it seems that he would like to follow his father and become a most violent Tory.'5
Peter Bathurst was in Padua on 25 May 1707,1 and was possibly the 'Mr Batters' in Rome in December 1707 with his governor 'Mr Douns'.2



Dr Batt had settled in Genoa by 1774 for the sake of his health. He was Professor of chemistry at the University from 1774 to 1787, and was elected to the Accademia delle Scienze at Turin in December 1783.1 He returned to England in 1787 and probably did not go back to Turin until 1790 (Prince Augustus met him in Genoa in December that year).  Lady Knight thought him 'a very good English doctor',2 and the botanist James Edward Smith, who met him in Genoa early in 1787, described him as 'a most ingenious English physician, who enjoys, and deserves, the chief practice in Genoa'.3 He attended Lady Grandison from October 1792 to January 1793 (see George, 2nd Earl Grandison) and he was to be prominent in caring for the victims of the epidemic which prevailed during the siege of Genoa in 1800. Batt also formed a collection of rare plants; his portrait by Caterina Castellini is in the Pinacoteca dell'Accademia Ligustica in Genoa, where a street is named after him.



Son of the builder of Penicuik House, John Baxter was sent to Rome to study architecture by Sir James Clerk of Penicuik, together with his brother Alexander. They arrived in Leghorn on the Groignard, and by August 1761 they were in Rome.1 Little is recorded of their stay. 'Mr Baxter Architct Scotland' was listed in Rome in 1762;2 the inscription Giovanni Baxter Architetto Scozzese Roma 24 di Marzo 1763 appears in an Italian translation of Seneca's Tragedies.3 In 1764 Baxter unsuccessfully entered an architectural design competition at the Accademia, Parma;4 his 'fine drawings' for the competition, 'being Plans, Elevations & Sections of the design for a Royal Sepulchral Chapel' were seen in his Rome studio by James Martin and James Byres on 27 October 1764, and Martin noted in the same house 'a young English painter who seems to be very clever at his Profession'.5 On 3 January 1765 Baxter wrote to his father from Rome, concerning copies of three ancient statues and a chimneypiece for Sir James Clerk.6 On 2 March 1766 Baxter was made an Honorary Member of the Accademia di S.Luca7 and in the same year he had some chimneypieces made in Rome to his designs, all subsequently 'broke in pieces in Carriage for Scotland'.8  A group portrait of 1767 (Vatican) shows Alexander and John Baxter with Alexander Runciman (another protégé of Sir James Clerk) and another artist (perhaps the young painter Martin had previously seen in his rooms); a sketch for this picture is in a private English collection. Baxter himself made a drawing of Alexander Runciman in Rome (SNG), the inscription saying it was used by J.T. Sergel as the source for a small relief sculpture. Baxter was back in Scotland by February 1769.9 His sale included designs for a 'Sepulchral Chapel', prints, drawings and antiquities (DBA).
Conceivably the Mr Baxter seen at Pisa in January 1795 by Captain Cochrane (Cochrane jnl.MSS).



Baynes accompanied Thomas Hardwick on an excursion from Naples to Paestum and Salerno on 15-19 May 1778; on their return they left Naples together on 4 June and reached Rome, via Mola and Piperno, three days later (Hardwick jnl.MSS).
Baspool' arrived in Rome on 16 December 1728, with Ingleby, Matthew Wise, [Charles] Lock and John, Lord Hervey; 'Robbers Baspoole' was still there on 20 January.1 In Florence in January 1730 Robert Bayspoole signed a statement concerning the arrest of the alleged Henry Howard.2


One of the Misses Beaghan was in Italy in 1732 with her sister Katherine and brother-in-law, see George Bubb Dodington. In January 1744, after she had married Leonardo Venturini, a publisher at Lucca, she visited Horace Mann telling him she was 'a person of great consequence'. Mann then remembered that 'she was here some years ago, and lodged with Mr Dodington and her sister (who I take it was his mistress) at Mr [Francis] Coleman's'.1  The third Miss Beaghan, to whom Venturini had first paid court in Boulogne-sur-Mer,2 was presumably the 'Miss Beagan' who with a 'Mr Schutz' accompanied the recently widowed Hester, Lady St John, from Naples to Rome in December 1748.3
At Easter 1730 'Sigr.Beal' was staying in Rome (with the unidentifiable 'Bisciar', 'Enrico Novi' and 'Tomasso St', all Protestants), near the Piazza di Spagna.1 He was in Padua on 22 October that year,2 and was reported in Venice on 1 December.3
On 10 September 1717, Alexander Cunningham wrote from Venice that 'Mr Barker and Mr Barecroft fellow in Oxford have been here, they came to see me, but I hear since they have seen ye pretdr, the last shews himself ill affected to ye Government'.1 On 11 September Edward Bearcroft and Francis Barker were in Padua.2
Lord Beauchamp travelled under the supervision of Walter Bowman, and set out in mid-October 1764 from Fontainebleau for Turin. He was there in December, about to leave for Genoa in mid-December.1 He had reached Florence by the end of January, Horace Mann describing him on 1 February as 'the most accomplished young nobleman who has passed here for many years',2 while Beauchamp found Mann of 'great merit'.3 In March 1765 Beauchamp said he had been abroad two years, and in Florence for two months; he intended to go from Florence 'to Rome, Naples, and from thence into Sicily after the summer heats are over; I shall return to Florence to assist at the Celebrity of the Archdukes [Leopold, who succeeded as Grand Duke of Tuscany] arrival here in the month of October, and then visit Milan, Bologna, and Venise ye only three towns of note that will then remain to be seen. I shall take leave of Italy about Christmas next'.3 He was said to be still in Florence on 23 April.4 From at least mid-June he was at Milan, and on 2 August he arrived in Florence, where he heard that his father was going to Ireland as Lord Lieutenant and had appointed him his secretary.5 He remained in Florence for about six weeks, awaiting instructions, in which time he met James Boswell;6 on 7 September he was trying to hire horses, but all that were fit 'to draw a chaise are employed for the Court' and he was trying instead to get mules to go by voiture to Bologna and Modena.5 Beauchamp left Florence on 14 September for England, to reach Paris twelve days later. After his departure he was elected an honorary member of the Florentine Academy on 28 September7 and, according to Horace Walpole, he later owned and figured in a large caricature group painted by Patch in Florence (now WSL), in which the 5th Earl of Berkeley and Sir Watkin Williams Wynn (who did not reach Italy until 1768) also appear.8
He died of smallpox at Bologna on his nineteenth birthday, 11 September 1744, while making the grand tour with his tutor Sturrock;1 he was buried in Westminster Abbey the following July.
William Assheton met Captain Beauchamp in Rome sometime in 1783/4,1 and he was seen there on 14 February 1784.2

Lord Aubrey Beauclerk served in the Mediterranean 1734-5 and in 1737-9 as captain of the Dolphin.1 On 28 October 1738 he delivered a letter from Admiral Haddock to the English minister at Florence.2 In 1739 Lord Sandwich sailed with him in the Dolphin from Lisbon to Genoa. There in June Lord Aubrey escorted Sir John Rawdon and introduced him to Lady Pomfret and 'all the first Genoese Nobility, by which means', wrote Rawdon, 'I saw all their Palaces, Pictures & Statues in perfection'.3 Lady Pomfret and her party then joined Lord Sandwich and sailed with Lord Aubrey to Leghorn,4 where they arrived on 27 June.5
On 4 June 1778 Lady Mary Coke was told that 'Mr Beauclerke, Lady Catherine and Mr Brand [Thomas Brand, d. 1794] were gone together abroad, being so in debt they found it troublesome staying at home'.1 Lady Catherine had committed a 'little indiscretion' to which her father asked Beauclerk to attend,2 doubtless her relationship with Brand (who had left a wife and children behind in England). They took with them their eldest daughters, Catherine (d. 1803) and Caroline (d. 1838).  They were in Rome by May 1778, where their eldest son Aubrey (1765-1815, later 6th Duke of St Albans) joined them,3 and Thomas Bowdler noticed them there in November.4 They were to spend nearly three years in Rome, during which they were active as collectors. In September 1779 they sent home 'diversi marmori consistenti nella maggior parte in restauri moderni' (and Brand sent back eight marble columns at the same time and a further consignment of marble fragments, a vase and two modern mosaic pictures on 11 April 1780).5 Smuglewicz painted two family portraits (Christie's, 23 Jun. 1978,6 and Cheltenham AG), the first with a view of Castel Gandolfo, where the Beauclerks rented apartments through the summer of 1779.7 It was probably James Byres who suggested this commission; Smuglewicz had painted the Byres family and the 1790 inventory of Byres's house listed a portrait of Mr Beauclerk by [Solomon] Williams and an engraving of Lady Catherine Beauclerk.8 Busts of Aubrey and Lady Catherine have been attributed to Christopher Hewetson (Christie's, 9 Jul. 1979).9 In February 1779 Lady Catherine organised a raffle for the marble relief of Alcyone and Ceyx by Thomas Banks,10 apparently to aid the sculptor on his return journey to England, see Banks.  The Beauclerks left Rome with the Irish painter Solomon Delane; they were in Germany by February 1781,11 and reached England at the end of August.12 Their return may have been prompted by Baron Vere (who d. 2 October 1781) although, according to Lady Mary Coke, they had had no intention of returning while he was alive.13 Thomas Brand remained abroad thinking it 'more proper not to arrive in England at the same time'.13 As 5th Duke of St Albans, Aubrey Beauclerk sold a large part of his collection on 8/9 June 1798 to finance the rebuilding of Hanworth; the sale catalogue described the works as 'collected during a long residence at Rome, and other parts of the Continent' and included marbles from Centocelle, a Farnese Hercules restored by Albacini, several bronzes by Zoffoli, and paintings by Marco Ricci, Marieschi, and Delane.
He appears to have returned to Italy after his first visit with his parents in 1779-81. 'Mr Beauclerk' met James Byres with young John Ramsay on 22 December 1782, and he took his leave of Allan Ramsay on 23 January 1783.1 'Beauclerk son to Lord Vere' was then returning to England with a parcel from James Irvine for George Cumberland.2
Like his father, Charles Beauclerk travelled to Naples for his health, arriving in the summer of 1793. He took a letter from his mother (dated Richmond, 20 July 1793) to William Hamilton in Naples and on 20 January 1794 his mother wrote thanking the Hamiltons for their kindness to her son and asking that he should write to her concerning his health.1 Lady Webster saw him in Naples in March 1794, describing him as Lord Holland's 'bosom friend', but 'silent and sulky and when he opens it is to tease his friend;' but she was also told that he was 'remarkably sensible, good-humoured, and pleasing to those that know him'.2 From Naples Beauclerk went to Rome, where he joined the Bessboroughs, Lord Grandison, Lord Holland and Lady Webster on an expedition to Tivoli, which ended abruptly when Bessborough, 'from a fit of jealousy about Mr Beauclerk', made them all return to Rome.3 Beauclerk left Rome in May 17944 with Lord Holland, intending to go to Switzerland; he arrived in Venice on 27 May ('Gio.Beauckelsh'),5 having passed through Florence, see Henry, 3rd Baron Holland. In July 1794 it was reported (presumably in retrospect) that he had been in Rome and was in Naples.6

Topham Beauclerk went to Italy for the sake of his health, and Dr Samuel Johnson asked his friend Giuseppe Baretti at Milan to receive him with particular kindness.1 He travelled out with Lord Ossory (see Upper Ossory) and passed through Paris and Geneva in July and September.2 On 20 November they were dining with Horace Mann in Florence2 and by 10 December they were in Rome,3 where Ossory, at least, stayed at Leoncilli's hotel in the Via Babuino (see above, p.xlv). James Martin saw them in Rome on the 17th and again in Naples on 1 January 1764;2 they had passed through Capua on 31 December 1763 and again on their return from Naples on 28 March 1764.4 On 11 May Ossory was in Rome dining with Lord Palmerston,2 and it may be assumed that Beauclerk was also there. They were next recorded in Venice; Lord Palmerston, who was there from 17 May to 22 June lists them among 'his party',5 and they were both included in the group of gentlemen with the Duke of York painted by Richard Brompton (see Brompton). It was also said that in one night of gambling with the Marquis Prie and the Neapolitan gamester Don Pepy, Beauclerk lost ten thousand sequins and Ossory four thousand (equivalent to ten thousand pounds).6 On 31 July Ossory and Beauclerk were together with the British resident, John Murray,7 but they separated soon after, Ossory alone being in Parma on 12 August with Brompton, while Beauclerk, presumably, returned home. In 1764 he became a member of Brooks's club in London, where he continued to gamble.8 Dr Johnson discovered little change in him on his return, commenting 'how little does travelling supply to the conversation of any man who has travelled? How little to Beauclerk?'9
As captain of the frigate Lyme he was serving in the Mediterranean between 1722 and 1727; he spent a few days in Rome in the second week of May 1724 with two companions, Scott and Otway,1 leaving for Leghorn on the 14th.2
The widowed Duchess took with her to Italy her only surviving daughter (out of five), Lady Mary Somerset, and her orphaned grand-daughter, Lady Elizabeth (Betty) Compton, then nine years old.1 She was concerned about the health of both, and had asked Dr Middleton 'whether going into a warmer climate with these young people is likely to be of use'. He had recommended a winter in Nice, where they stayed from October 1770 until May 1771. Once in Italy the Duchess settled down to a punishing routine of visiting houses, gardens and collections. Her daughter and grand-daughter were seldom mentioned in her diaries during these visits, and may well have been closeted with governess and tutors.  The Duchess had arrived in Turin by 25 November 1771. She visited the Palazzo Reale where she saw the Royal Family of Savoy, and remarked on the pictures, dwelling on the famous Gerrit Dou of the dropsical woman. The sculpture and paintings she preferred depended on force of narrative or sentimental power. Donato Bagone was her guide in Bologna and M. L'Auditeur Bertolini in Siena. Rome was reached by 11 December 1771, but a volume of her diary is missing from 12 December 1771 to 18 June 1772. They had arrived to stay at Horace Mann's house in Pisa on 25 April,2 and they stayed on at Florence until December 1772. The Duchess was fascinated by the 'coup D'oeil' of the procession at the Palazzo Vecchio on the feast of St John, and she described the Loggia dei Lanzi.  They were in Naples in December 1772, having passed through Capua on the 11th.3 They visited Pompei with 'Ld Tylney, Baron Tuyll[?], Mr [the Rev. William] Preston, [Thomas] Chase, Mr Stoppard, Mrs Dolben & the Young ladies'; she commented on the columns 'none of wch are of good architecture, they are of brick cover'd with plaister and fluted'. She thought the Palace of Capo di Monte 'heavy and exceedingly ugly', but the pictures 'noble'. There was a March visit to Herculaneum and the Royal Palace where 'is a room lin'd with china made at Naples'.  Throughout the diaries the Duchess mentioned the books she and the girls read. She quoted copiously from Winckelmann '4 epochas and 4 stiles of ye Grecian Art' and Cochin's 'Voyage d'Italie'. In April she visited 'Ly Hamilton's' and one evening 'we went to Sir Wm Hamilton's where we saw several Electrical Experiments & an Representation of M. Vessuvius as it appeared at the Eruption of 1767'. On 6 May 1773 they left Naples for Rome meeting up with Thomas Jenkins, (whose collection she saw), Mrs Dolben and Mr Stopford [Stoppard?]. At her lodgings she received 'Mr Mansell Talbot, Mssrs. [Valentine] Quin Palmer & Brown and ye Abbot Grant'. But throughout her journey her company was equally French and Italian. In June she met Mengs at M. de St-Odile's and then 'went to his house & saw Ld Cowper's Picture'. The next day she visited '[William] Miller's a young english Painter.' She visited the Palazzo Colonna with Jenkins, and on 28 June she 'went with Mr byers to see a Chimney Piece afterward to ye ancient Temple of Claudius'. By 3 July 1773 the party was back in Florence dining at Horace Mann's, but they had returned to Rome by 23 November. She continued to see a great deal of both James Byres and Thomas Jenkins. In January 1774 she visited St Peter's with Byres, and her diary reflects the pedagogue's manner; in February she saw in Byres's house 'a beautiful Assumption of the Virgin by Guido/£100/ the Adoration of the Kings by Rubens admirable/£100', and in March Byres 'came to read over Architecture with ye young ladies'. In April she visited more churches and houses with Byres and even went to conversations where 'Mr Byres gave a small lecture on Architecture first'. On 23 April 'Mr Maron came to draw Lady Betty's Picture' (of which Byres reported on 25 April 1775 it was 'esteem'd very like and extremely well finished by those who have seen it').4 With Byres again the entire party went to 'Minellis a sculptor and then to Hew[et]sons. They are both very good artists'. Father Thorpe meanwhile was observing that the Duchess took great care of her 'daughters', of whom Lady Mary, it was rumoured, was to marry the young Prince Bracciano; there were 'great disgusts' between the Duke and Duchess of Cumberland who were then in Rome;5 'the Duchess of Beaufort is disgraced by her imprudent refusal to wait upon them at their arrival', George Grenville confirmed to William Hamilton.6  They left Rome on 10 May 1774, going to Etruria and across the Appenines, stopping to see the Falls of Terni. They passed through Bologna where they met Donna Basso who 'often disputes in the Schools'. On 14 June they arrived in Venice;7 they visited 'Mrs [Joseph] Smith', and toured the city with George Grenville and John Udny (Joseph Smith's successor as consul), the Duchess finding St Mark's 'old & gloomy in a very bad stile of Architecture'. They proceeded to Vicenza ('the Olimpick Theatre a most beautiful Building'), and by 27 June were back in Milan inspecting buildings and silk factories. They met Sir William Lynch and a Mr G. Cooke in Turin on 1 July, before finally setting off home. The Duchess had exercised her patronage in Italy. She commissioned two views of Florence from Patch (which were nearly finished in April 1774), and copies from Raphael and Guido Reni by William Parry. Mengs painted Lady Mary (received by Mann in April 1774). Byres designed a chimneypiece for her (Badminton), his original design having been shown to the Duchess by Mengs in Florence in July 1773. All these, with prints, casts and marble-topped tables, were shipped back to England through Byres. Five cases were acknowledged by the Duchess on 30 May 1775: 'they all arriv'd but some of the scagliola figures are miserably mained & defac'd', and five more were to be dispatched in April 1775, with the chimneypiece and the Maron portrait.
The young Duke, a Jacobite, had succeeded to his estates at the age of seven. At the age of nineteen he travelled for his general education, accompanied by his steward, Dominique du Four. There was also a governor, William Philips, an elderly and apparently devious Jacobite, nevertheless recommended by the Pretender himself as one whose 'greater experience of the world may enable him to moderate sometimes in you a zeal which cannot be too much commended, but which it may be sometimes more advisable to conceal.'1 Beaufort's Italian journey was to prove more remarkable for the collections he then made, and specifically for his commission from the Grand Duke's workshops of the extraordinary 'Badminton Cabinet'.  He had spent eight months in France before reaching Turin by 13 April 1726.2 He briefly visited Milan, Modena and Bologna before spending four days in Florence, where the consul Colman described him as being accompanied by Wogan, 'a young Gentleman of Ireland', and Philips, 'an Irish gentleman of about sixty years of age' and a Catholic who 'had served formerly [with] the Irish troops of France'.3 On 4 May the Duke left Leghorn for Rome, consul Skinner saying he had come from Lucca and Florence with Philips and Wogan (who 'had previously been in Italy with 'a son of My Lord Falklands').4 Beaufort arrived in Rome on 6 May and spent seven months there, interrupted only by a three-week visit to Naples in October.  His Jacobite sympathies were hardly disguised in Rome, and James Edgar, the Pretender's secretary, later recalled that 'the Duke of [Beaufort] was the man of all Great Britain who had most often ascended the staircase to the Pretender's rooms'.5 It was generally understood that the Duke, with 'son humeur douce, docile', was being manipulated by Philips, 'un homme aussi fier, et imperieux & aussi gâté dans ses Principes', and Beaufort confessed that he did not know how to rid himself of his governor.6 They stayed in the Casa Guarnieri and were constantly observed by Stosch.7 On 9 June Beaufort gave a lavish entertainment to mark the anniversary of the Stuart Restoration, and on 27 July he held a great reception to mark the birthday of the Princess Clementina, the Pretender's wife. Stosch even found himself threatened by Philips in the Vatican where the Duke's party were inspecting Raphael tapestries. By 10 August Stosch noted the Duke was spending a lot of money on pictures. In this he was advised not only by Philips, but by the Scottish painter Patrick Cockburn, the Roman antiquary Ficoroni and his landlord, Giovanni Francesco Guarnieri.  When consul Edward Allen reported the Duke's presence in Naples on 4 October he mentioned the party included Philips, 'Nicholas Wogan, a Lieutenant in General Dillon's Regiment in the French service, and one Mr Cockburne, a Scotch Painter [Patrick Cockburn], whom the Duke has employed to buy pictures, & they say has laid out to the value of Six Thousand Pound Sterling therein at Rome'.8 Reporting Beaufort's departure back to Rome on 19 October, Allen said he had allowed Beaufort credit of 'one Thousand Pound Sterling, whereof two thousand five hundred Crowns were remitted by me to Mr Thomas Tyrrell[,] Chamberlayn to the Great Duke of Tuscany for the purchase of a fine Cabinett, which the Duke saw, when he passed through Florence & was afterwards agreed for at said price by Mr Tyrrell'.9 This is the first mention of the Badminton Cabinet.  On 23 November Stosch again mentioned Beaufort's collecting activities in Rome; he had acquired a 'large quantity of statues, Busts, and pictures' which had been sent to Leghorn for shipment. On 14 December Stosch grudgingly reported that Beaufort 'is said to have spent over 30,000 scudi on pictures and marbles, which, with the exception of eight or ten pieces, the majority are of little importance. He has bought Raphael's original drawing in large [cartoon?] for the Transfiguration in S.Pietro Martiro [now Vatican], of the size of the original with the exception of the figures at the top which are missing'.10 But the Duke appears to have bought with some discrimination.11 He obtained access to the collections of the Cardinals Albani and Alberoni, perhaps through his great-uncle the Duke of Ormonde. Alberoni presented him with an urn (untraced) and a celebrated antique sarcophagus (now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art). From Albani he bought paintings attributed to Claude, Leonardo da Vinci and Palma Vecchio, and he bought others from Priore Vaini and Antonio Borrioni. He acquired paintings by Guercino and Raphael, a Fortuna and Nursing of Jupiter by Salvator Rosa (sold 1957), and he commissioned paintings from Pietro Berton ('8 pictures especially painted for His Excellency'). Beaufort and Philips each acquired from 'Mr Wolfgang' a miniature portrait set in a ring of the Princess Clementina.12 In addition Beaufort left with Guarnieri a commission for a cube room at Badminton to be lined with Italian marbles; it was never installed, though some of the marble appears to have been incorporated in the chapel at Badminton when it was rebuilt in 1783.13 Eventually ninety-six cases of works of art were shipped from Leghorn in 1728. Beaufort left Rome on 13 December. A week later Tyrrell in Florence had received his commission for 'a very fine inlaid Cabinet'.14 This was one of the greatest works of decorative art ever commissioned by a British patron; 'the famous rich cabinet' which Tyrrell finally sent to England in 1732 was 'a very curious piece of workmanship. It was made in the Great Duke's Gallery & has cost his Grace I believe full two thousand pounds', as Skinner reported.15 It was sold from Badminton in 1990. On leaving Rome Beaufort passed rapidly through Spoleto, Ancona and Ravenna to Venice, where he arrived on 27 December. He spent three months there, in the course of which he and his governor were observed by Willem Bentinck and his governor Moses Bernege. Beaufort left for England through the cities of the Veneto in March and April. On 27 March he was in Padua with Philips, Wogan and Cockburn.16  Throughout their tour Philips had borrowed money from the Duke to build up his own collection of works of art but, on their return to London, he was accused of selling a number of the Duke's purchases in Cock's sale rooms (on 24-5 January 1728). Patrick Cockburn told the Duke that some of the pictures sold bore Philips's seal, and that Philips was 'a gentleman of Honour'.11

He wrote from Florence on 30 November 1789, that he had spent eleven days there, and would 'spend four more ... From the accounts I have heard of Rome, I am inclined to think that I shall find myself fortunate in the plan of staying but a fortnight, till my return from Naples. The people at Florence say, that four thousand French the number supposed to be now in Rome, have occupied all the lodgings' (G. Beaufoy, Leaves from a Beech Tree, 147).

A disciple of Reynolds and an admirer of Wilson (who for him remained the painter of Rome), Beaumont went to Italy with his wife in 1782. He caught a cold crossing the Channel (and ever after suffered a recurrent fever), but was able to make a series of rough sketches on their journey south (their itinerary is provided by drawings still in the Beaumont collection), marking their arrival in Rome with a drawing of the Campo Vaccino. In Rome the Beaumonts stayed at Margherita's and they were very social. The young John Ramsay frequently met them between 18 December 1782 and 29 March 1783 with, for example, Lord St Asaph, and sometimes James Byres and Philipp Hackert.1 In March 1783 the Beaumonts visited Naples where their old friend Thomas Jones accompanied them by boat, sketching the coast of Posillipo.2  Beaumont was prepared to study the old master collections in Rome (Michelangelo and Claude became his passion) and he drew the usual sights, often in the company of artists.3 Lady Beaumont, highly cultured and fluent in Italian, also became a skilled copyist of old master drawings (one of her copies after Carracci is in the Ashmolean Museum). Beaumont took painting lessons from Zucchi and Jacob More4 (two of his thinly painted landscapes were sold in 1985 [Christie's, 18 Oct.]), and he was in touch with Angelica Kauffman, Philipp Hackert, Gavin Hamilton, Allan Ramsay and probably Carlo Labruzzi. Beaumont's first fine drawings are of Lago Albano (17 October), L'Arricia, Morino, and Lake Nemi (2 November). His best and largest pencil and wash drawings date from a spring fortnight in Tivoli and owe much to the example of J.R. Cozens, who had arrived in Rome in December 1782 and was a frequent companion. At some date Beaumont, who supported Cozens in his decline, acquired the Cozens album of tracings and several watercolours and oils.5 Nothing is known of the painting Beaumont requested of More,4 nor of the unfinished view of Velletri, a gift from Jones who refused a commission.2  In 1786, three years after the Beaumonts had returned to England, Jacob More failed to obtain for him two minor Claudes from the Barberini collection. Beaumont's considerable connoisseurship dated from this Italian tour and it was his great sorrow that the Napoleonic war and poor health delayed a return to 'this enchanted ground' until 1822.
Messrs Shelley and Beaumont, Officers, Gentlemen of condition and of real merit', were recommended to William Hamilton in Naples in November 1785.1 Mr Beaumont and Mr Shelley were seen in Rome during the winter of 1785-6,2 and 'Mr. Beaumont - a Yorkshire man' was reported in Naples on 18 January 1787.3 He may have been the 'Monsieur Beaumont' living near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1787.4
"In 1766 John Becher was described in Leghorn as 'Negoziante Inglese da molti anni stabilito in questa citta'; he was visiting London that year, having inherited money from a relation.1 He was probably the 'Becherg', merchant in Leghorn, of 'Tucker Becherg Co.' in 1742-3,2 and the John Becher, husband of Mary, three of whose daughters were buried in infancy in Leghorn between 1745 and 1751.3  Between March and November 1775, Patrick Home had several vexatious dealings with Becher and his son, 'William Becher Junior'. On 22 November young Becher had just arrived in Rome '""Post-haste"" from Naples for the Possesso [the enthronement of the new Pope] - and returned there for ye winter. Their Hemp Manufactory is gone by ye Devil. the partners are all by the Ears and gone to law together, and poor old Becher will be trick'd out of all.'4 'Sigre Becher, Porter and Smith' apparently ship-brokers, were cited in a legal action in Civitavecchia in 1771 concerning damaged cargo, and again in 1775, now as 'Becher, Smith & Co'.5 A John Becher, merchant, was also cited in a law suit in Naples in October-December 1776.6"
An eminent sportsman who 'would bag a fox in Greek, find a hare in Latin, inspect his kennels in Italian, and direct the economy of his stables in exquisite French' (DNB), Peter Beckford was first abroad on succeeding his father in 1764.1 He was a diligent traveller, who later reflected that on the grand tour 'Agriculture, Natural History, Trade, Commerce, Arts and Sciences, all present themselves to improve and enlarge our understanding'.2  Late in 1765 he reached Turin where he hunted with the King of Sardinia and met Laurence Sterne, passing 'hours with that eccentric genius that might have been more profitably employed, but never more agreeably'. He continued through Milan, Genoa and Bologna to Florence where he bought two racehorses: 'After I had taught my Jockey ... how to make his horse win, he soon found out, without any teaching, how to make him lose whenever it suited his interest'. He proceeeded via Perugia to Rome where he found no English Ambassador; 'but the Cardinal de Bernis, a perfect Frenchman de la vieille Court, does the honours ... to all strangers'. He undertook a six-week antiquarian tour under James Byres, 'and no school-boy toiled harder or at times more unwillingly; hurrying over pleasing objects to visit stones and rubbish of very little importance, for what? - to say I had visited all the antiquities of Rome'. Beckford gave an outdoor concert in the Piazza di Spagna (and he was to bring back to England the young harpsichordist Muzio Clementi, who stayed seven years with Beckford in Dorset). He also sat to Batoni for a portrait dated 1766 (Copenhagen; Clark/Bowron 296). On 17 September 1766 Henry Sherdley was asking for news of Beckford 'who is somewhere in Italy but none of his friends know where';3 he was apparently in Naples, where he heard Caterina Gabrielli sing.  Beckford returned to Italy in 1783 with his wife and their two children, William and Harriet. For sixteen years he lived principally in Florence, although he made some brief visits back to England. His wife's health was a source of constant concern, though at first she appeared to improve. They were seen in Florence in November 1785 by the 10th Earl of Pembroke;4 in Siena in August 1788 they were giving regular concerts every Saturday;5 Arthur Young saw them in Florence on 23 November 1789;6 Elizabeth Gibbes dined with Mrs Beckford in Florence on 29 June 1790;7 on 17 December 1790 James Clitherow visited them and early the following year he saw at Pozzuoli an antique pedestal for which Beckford had unsuccessfully offered £2000.8 Mrs Beckford's health then rapidly declined and she died in Florence on 30 April 1791 attended by her mother, Lady Rivers (see Penelope Pitt), and was buried in Leghorn. In the same cemetery a daughter, Aloysia aged three, had been buried in 1788,9 and Lady Rivers herself was to be buried there in 1795.  Beckford stayed on in Florence. On 11 November 1793 Lord and Lady Palmerston visited him when he was living in Lord Cowper's 'most magnificent palace' for only £60 a year; Lady Palmerston found Miss Beckford 'extremely handsome' and William 'a fine youth'; on 19 November Beckford dined with the Palmerstons, Lady Palmerston finding him 'extremely agreeable and gentlemanlike'.10 On 7 and 28 April 1796 the Beckford children were described in the Wynne Diaries; Harriet was 'charming ... vastly pretty, kind and amiable', but 'severely treated by her father', while William stuttered, was 'rather stupid, ... and occupies himself alone with music'. Beckford stayed in Florence right up to the French invasion; he left first for Palermo, but soon after returned to England.  His Familiar Letters from Italy to a Friend in England [1805] provide a lively account of his Italian experiences; many of the letters were written in 1787 and 'most before the Invasion of Italy by the French'. He has also been credited with Letters and Observations written on a short tour through France and Italy by a Gentleman [1786], although the style is much drier; it contains twenty-six letters dated from January to August 1785 indicating an itinerary through Rome (22 Mar.), Naples (8 Apr.), Rome (-11 Jun.), Florence (Jun.) and Venice (7 Jul.).
Beckford and the 3rd Duke of Dorset received Dr Burney in Rome on 21 September 1770 and arranged musical concerts in his honour.1 A 'Cav. Bekforte' was in Florence on 29 September 17702 and on 7 November 'Mr Beckford' was about to leave Turin for Rome.3 In May 1771 James Byres had heard from Beckford in Venice4 and in September he learned that Beckford's proposed journey to Russia with a Mrs Buchanan and the painter George Robertson had ended in Hamburg.5 Beckford and his party were back in London by November.6  Beckford subsequently took both Robertson and the painter Philip Wickstead with him to Jamaica,7 perhaps in 1773-4.
Sensitive, spoiled and unconventional, Beckford undertook his first Italian tour to pass the last year of his minority before succeeding to his father's considerable estates. It was also a relief from emotional entanglements with Louisa Pitt, the wife of his uncle Peter Beckford, and with the eleven-year-old William Courtenay. He was accompanied by a tutor, the Rev. John Lettice, as he subsequently described in his Dreams, Waking Thoughts and Incidents, in a series of letters from various parts of Europe [1783].1 He came first to Venice, with whose history he was already familiar, and he was enchanted, 'stalking proudly about, like an actor in an antient Greek tragedy'. He dreamed of Frederick Barbarossa and found 'St Mark's a mosque; and the neighbouring palace, some vast seraglio'; he particularly admired Titian's Martyrdom of St Peter in S.Giovanni e Paolo, and Veronese's Marriage of Cana. He was attended by Mme de Rosenberg, and he grew fond of a youth of the Cornaro family. On 6 September he visited Petrarch's house in Arqua and indulged his 'pensive humour, over some ejaculatory sonnet'. Of the Medici collections in Florence he told Alexander Cozens that 'when I beheld such ranks of statues, such treasures of gems and bronzes - I fell into a delightful delerium - which none but souls like ours experience, and, unable to check my rapture, flew madly from Bust to Bust and Cabinet to Cabinet like a Butterfy bewildered in an Universe of Flowers'.2 In Rome he decided that 'I absolutely will have no antiquary to go prating from fragment to fragment, and tell me, that were I to stay five years in Rome, I should not see half it contained. The thought alone, at so much to look at, is quite distracting, and makes me resolve to view nothing at all in a scientific way; but straggle and wander about, just as the spirit chuses'.3 His accounts of his travels are ever concerned with romantic states of mind. His presence in Rome had aroused hopes among English artists; 'young Beckford', wrote James Irvine, 'laid out a little money tho but a few days in town; and as he returns in Holy Week from Venice it is hoped he will scatter a little of his immense fortune among the artists'.4 He entered Naples in November under a sombre sky and driving rain. He was the guest of his kinsman, Sir William Hamilton, but it was (the first) Lady Hamilton ('the most heavenly minded creature') who cared for him. On his return journey he again visited Venice and left with great sadness: 'Adieu chers moments de Venise', he wrote, 'Votre souvenir ne s'evanouira qu'avec mon existence.'5  Beckford succeeded to his great fortune in 1782 and, unsettled by growing rejection from society, he told Lady Hamilton on 26 March that he was 'determined to breathe peaceably next Summer at Naples'.6 His tour was rapid and magnificent. He was accompanied by J.R. Cozens,7 his tutor and factotum the Rev. John Lettice, his physician Dr Projectus Errhardt, the harpsichordist John Burton, and a large retinue of servants; he was mistaken in Augsburg for the Emperor of Austria. They passed through Venice to Padua where he rediscovered the thrall of the church of S.Antonio and became 'very devout and melancholy'.8 At Rome he found the festival of SS.Peter and Paul with 'Cannon bouncing, trumpets flourishing, Pope gabbling, Cardinals stinking, and Fish frying in every corner'.9 In Naples on 10 July he visited Thomas Jones's studio in the artist's absence; on 3 August Jones wrote that Beckford's 'exquisitely delicate habit of body obliged him frequently to change his Situation and Air', and that he 'was at this time Accomodated, by the great attention of Sr W Hamilton, with the use of his palace or Villa at Portici - Dr [Alexander] Drummond a Scotch Physician ... was frequently sent for to attend him'.10 Most of Beckford's party had succumbed to malaria; Burton died in Naples and Cozens took a month to recover. Lady Hamilton herself died on 25 August. Beckford left Naples on 10 September for Leghorn and home, while Cozens stayed behind,10 to rejoin him in Geneva in October.  Beckford returned to Naples in 1792. He wrote to Sir William Hamilton from Lausanne on 28 September saying his seven musicians were already on their way and he intended to follow them within two weeks. By December 1793 he was in Lisbon, but considering a return to Naples, for, he wrote, 'I should not die contented without seeing you, Ly H. & Naples again', Emma's friendship having thrown 'a bright ray over my whole existence'.11 But his attempt to reach Naples from Portugal in September 1795 was defeated by bad weather.12 In 1821 Beckford wrote retrospectively 'I am frightened by the faraway-ness of Italy: as a place to travel in, well and good, but to live there continuously - God save me from it'.13 Beckford's original diary from 26 October to 3 November 1780 is now with the Beckford Papers in the Bodleian Library. It was reworked into his account of his first visit to Italy, Dreams (see above), but Beckford quickly ordered its suppression; an edited version appeared in 1834 in the first volume of his Italy, with sketches of Spain and Portugal.
Beckingham appears to have spent a year in Rome, during which he commissioned and acquired a number of works of art. Batoni painted his portrait in 1752 (Clark/Bowron 164; Christie's, 22 Nov. 1985) and at Easter 1753 Beckingham was staying with 'Sig.Greenhill' in a house on the Strada della Croce.1 He commissioned drawings from Richard Wilson (completed in 1755) and a painting Time discovering Truth (completed in August 1757) from Thomas Jenkins, who also undertook to supply antiquities for his garden, provided that Beckingham would tell him 'for what particular use' he intended them: 'I mean, what part they are to ornament, either walks or buildings; and if to be exposed to the weather, or under cover, that I may, when occasion offers, choose you such things as are most proper for the purpose'; Wilson had also been in correspondence with Beckingham who passed on a commission from him to Jenkins.2  A list survives of works of art acquired by Beckingham in (or from) Italy (Beckingham list MSS). In addition to the pictures mentioned above, it includes four large landscapes by Richard Wilson (two have been identified in priv. colls., one dated 1754),3 six drawings of statues by Jacob Ennis (who arrived in Rome in c.1754); four busts in marble by Simon Vierpyl; six views of Rome in watercolours by J.B. Lallemand (Sotheby's, 21 Feb. 1962); a set of sulphurs by Christiano Dehn; a copy in miniature by Batoni of his portrait of Beckingham; 'Ld Dartmouth's Picture'; two drawings by Clérisseau of ruins (Sotheby's 10 Apr. 1957) and 'Heads in the Vatican on Oil Paper' by Paolo Fidanza. Other lists show Beckingham also assembled an impressive antiquarian library.

The 5th Duke of Bedford spent the greater part of 1784 and 1785 in foreign travel, returning from the Continent in August 1786 (DNB). He is said to have accompanied Sir John Fleming Leicester on his grand tour in 1785.1 Michael Kelly alleged meeting him in Naples in May 1779, when the Duke would have been fourteen years of age.2

Mischievously described by Horace Walpole as a 'most bigoted Papist from Norfolk',1 he arrived in Venice on 28 February 1710 with his governor, Mr [presumably George] Waters.2 On his return it was commented that 'ye advantage of a noble stature and proportions, a careful education in learning and exercises, and those polished by travell in foreign Courts, gives great hopes he will be a worthy descendant to such deserving Ancestors'.3 In 1714 Bedingfield furnished Henry Lee Warner with an introduction to the Grand Duke at Florence.4
He was in Leghorn in 1742/3 with the firm of 'Belson & Belasya' and in May 1744 as 'Antony Balasyla'.1 In March 1750, writing from Naples, Thomas Barrett asked that his letters should be sent 'care of Mr. Belasise at Leghorn'.2 His son Rowland Belasyse (1745- 1810), who succeeded his cousin as 6th Viscount Fauconberg in 1802, was born in Leghorn.
In 1777 he accompanied a son of Lord Clifford [Hugh or Charles] to Italy. Father Thorpe called on them unsuccessfully several times in Rome and noted they had a second audience with the Pope on 23 April, and were in Naples at the end of May.1 Thomas Pelham [later 2nd Earl of Chichester] wrote on 10 June that he had ' met Mr Belasyse at Rome & [Naples], he is travelling with a Son of Ld Clifford an agreeable man enough & a most rigid Roman Catholic'.2 They were in Florence at the end of June,3 and arrived in Venice on 8 September.4
Appointed to the commission of enquiry into the state of the British forces in Spain and Portugal, Sir Henry passed through Milan and Turin in February 1712 with his fellow commissioners, Stowell and Andrew Archer,1 reaching Genoa in March.2

In Venice on 4 May 1788 he dined with T. C. Porter, and others.1 A 'Mons. Belford Inglese' arrived in Venice on 5 March 1790.2

William Gifford recalled spending 'many years' with Lord Belgrave 'in two successive tours',1 details of which are sparse. Lord Belgrave came to Venice on 12 May 1786 (with the unidentifiable Lords 'Riglinton' and 'Clinton').2 Belgrave and Gifford were in France in 1787;3 Belgrave was in Geneva that summer, and in the winter of 1787-8 he was in Italy with Gifford.4 William Gifford was probably the 'Gifford' seen in Rome on 9 December 1787.5  Belgrave was elected to Parliament on 22 April 1788 and he apparently made a second tour of Italy with Gifford in 1789, returning in 1790.6 Gifford subsequently published satires on the Della Cruscan poets in Florence (The Baviad and The Maeviad, 1794 and 1795).
Mrs Bell dined with Elizabeth Gibbes on 19 July 1790, and on 20 August Mr Bell introduced her to Sir Frederick Eden.1 Whaley Armitage met a Mr Bell, probably the same, at Dashwood's in Rome in December 1790, and had met Bell's brother earlier that year in Paris.2 Maria Villiers (see John Charles Villiers) dined with Bell and others at Lord Clifford's the following April,3 and a Mr Bell was in Venice from 9-21 May 1791.4
Bellamy went abroad on being declared bankrupt in September 1754;1 he was in Leghorn on his way to the Levant in January 1755.2
Described by Father Thorpe as an Irishman and agent for his Primate, Bellew was in Rome from at least March 1777 until February 1780 when he left for his consecration in Brussels.1 Thomas Jones recorded dining with Rowland Burdon, John 'Warwick' Smith, John Coxe Hippisley, 'Abbe Belew' and John Soane at the Villa Lanti on 19 July 1779.2
Bellew arrived in Venice on 2 October 1779.1 He reached Turin on the 10th and was admitted to the Academy five days later.2 Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) called on Bellew, a 'young English Catholic', at the Academy in December and they became great friends before Herbert's departure in March the following year.2 He was still in Turin on 2 December 1781 when 'Belley' was presented at Court by Lord Mountstuart.3
Lord Bellew was in Lyons in the summer of 1731,1 and on 13 September in Lucca he was married by a Jesuit priest, Richardson, to Lady Anne Maxwell, daughter of the Jacobite 5th Earl of Nithsdale (who was then travelling under the assumed name of Brown).2 They travelled to Leghorn, arriving by 26 September,2 and from there to Pistoia, where they lived in a palace for some time before going on to Florence and Rome in February 1732.3 In Rome they were listed at Easter 1732 and 1733 as living in the Via di San Sebastianello, near the Piazza di Spagna.4 A Mrs Lindsay, who spent eight years in Italy, was then living with them, attending Lady Bellew.5 Their daughter, Mary Frances, was born in 1732 and Joseph Spence met 'Lady Bellieu, Lady Ann, Lady Frances' between May and June that year.6 By the end of September, Lord and Lady Bellew were in Florence with David Nairne, the Pretender's treasurer, who was travelling secretly with them to England; they had departed for Bologna by 3 October.7  After the death of his third wife, Bellew visited Italy again in the company of his daughter. They passed through Turin with a Mr Butler at the end of May 1754.8
John Arundell Bellings was well received in Italy, being an English Catholic of distinguished family whose father had been secretary to Catherine of Braganza. He travelled with a Catholic governor, George Waters, whose journal (Waters jnl. MSS) provides their detailed itinerary and records their frequent encounters with Catholic clergy. There are few references to works of art, though at Lucca they made a brief tour 'to look at villas' with Lord Kinnaird (9 Dec.). On 13 December Bellings had an audience in Florence with the Grand Duke who, the next day, sent him 'a present consisting of 16 whole Flasks of wine, 16 Pidgeons alive, 5 Partridges, 4 Mordadellos, and 12 Large tasses of Liquid Sweetmeates', followed a month later by 'a present of a whole wild boar'. Bellings began his study of Italian with a language master on 14 December. On Christmas Day they attended Mass in the Medici Chapel. Two days later they visited Antonio Magliabechi, the Grand Duke's remarkable librarian, originally trained as a silversmith: 'We found him at his house in the midst of his Bokes very slovenly drest after his ordinary manner,' Waters wrote; 'no man has a better memory than he, nor can give a better account of Bookes in general'; he talked well and was 'very satirical', but he was also 'very greedy of prays & is never so well pleased as when he is commended or flattered'. On 19 January Henry Newton, the British envoy, introduced him to the antiquarian John Talman and took them to see Massimiliano Soldani working on the four bronze copies of statues in the Tribuna commissioned by Queen Anne for Blenheim. In March Bellings and Waters visited the Grand Duke's laboratory, where 'they make all those little remedies that are given sometimes for Presents at Florence by the Great Duke and are sent from thence in Little boxes to all parts of Europe'.  They reached Rome via Siena on 27 March 1711 and took lodgings at the Monte d'Oro, by the Piazza di Spagna. On 29 March, having attended 'Pontifical High Mass in the Chapel of Sixtus' they called upon the Catholic Colleges in the city. Travelling gentlemen and Catholic clergy called on them in their lodgings (some thirty British names are cited), and Cardinal Imperiali sent them 'a Dish of the finest Troutes we ever saw'. On 14 April they set out for Naples, where they remained until 4 May, seeing the sights and attending the liquefaction of the blood of S.Januarius. They had an audience with the Viceroy, who received them rather coldly (having just heard the news of the death of the Emperor Joseph I, as they afterwards discovered). They returned to their lodgings at the Monte d'Oro in Rome, until they had found new apartments at Pietro Lamotte's locanda in the Strada della Croce. During the following months, Bellings was taken on a course of antiquities by the Abbate Vacodio and he began lessons in architecture. Bellings and Waters left Rome on 1 September 1711, and travelled via Spoleto, Loreto, Ancona and Bologna to Venice, where they stayed five days.1 They were in Padua on 22 September2 and passed through Vicenza and Verona as they left Italy for Germany. Waters's journal ends at Ghent on 2 May 1712.

Gio: Belshes' and 'Giorgio Stuart' were listed in Rome at Easter 1741 staying in the Strada Condotti in Rome.1 They may be identified as the 'Bluchier', 'Belchiere'/'Belchier' and Stuart/Stewart, two Scotch gentlemen, lodging at Naples in January 1741 with Richard Pococke, who described the latter as 'governor to a young gentleman that dyed here about a fortnight ago of a consumption' (it has also been suggested that Stuart may have been James 'Athenian' Stuart2). The three met again in Rome in February3 and Joseph Spence also met 'Belches' and Stuart in Rome at this time.4 Belsches wrote from Rome to his brother Thomas on 31 March, saying he had purchased on commission for Sir John Clerk of Penicuik a painting from Imperiali's widow at what he considered the extravagant price of 10 Roman Crowns, or two and a half guineas, plus transport and commission; he was then about to set out for Venice, where he would be happy to execute further commissions, if there was anything Sir John wished.5


Benazech went to Rome at the age of fifteen in 1782, and in October 1783 he went to Florence, where he was ill.1 On 11 January 1784 he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno,2 and he was last recorded in Florence in February 1784.1 On his return journey to England he worked with Greuze in Paris. A Self portrait of c.1790 is in the Uffizi.
Benbridge arrived in Rome with Christopher Hewetson in 17651 and was said to have studied under both Mengs and Batoni.2 Two of his modest Roman portraits, a gentleman and lady of the Rosti-Rolla family, are in a private collection in America. In 1768 he was in Corsica where he painted General Paoli (exhibited in London 1769) for James Boswell, and in Florence in 1769 he painted General Paoli at the Battle of Ponte Nuovo (priv. coll.). He applied to copy in the Uffizi in August 1769,3 and was presumably the 'Benbridge' caricatured by Thomas Patch in Florence that year. He left Italy in November 1769 and arrived in London on 7 December. An Italian sketchbook containing drawings of architecture and antiquities, was in a private collection in 1980.



He travelled for his health with his wife and son, but died in Siena on 9 September 1778, aged 55, and was buried in Leghorn (Leghorn Inscr., 44).


Mrs Bentham, recently widowed for a second time, travelled with her son John Farr Abbot and her invalid daughter-in-law, Mary, for whose health the journey was undertaken. She recorded her travels in a detailed and rather homely diary (Bentham jnl.MSS) which dwells on matters of diet and economy, as well as on society. They reached Italy in October 1793 and proceeded directly to Naples. They spent four nights in Florence at Megit's hotel and three in Rome, where Mrs Bentham rapidly concluded that 'excepting the Magnificence of its Palaces & Churches, and the Beauty of its Fountains, Rome has nothing within nor without its walls to make it desirable for an English person to be an inhabitant.'  In Naples they took an expensive seven-room apartment in the 'Ville de Londres' overlooking the bay, but within five weeks, on 11 December, Mrs Abbot died. Three days later her body was shipped to England for burial in Westminster Abbey. Mrs Bentham and her son did not stay on in Naples, though they found time to visit Sir William Hamilton's 'English Apartment' filled with pictures of Emma by Romney and Vigée Lebrun. Returning to Rome, they stayed at Margherita's, and their days were filled with calls, dinners and conversazioni. They also visited the studios of Grignion, Deare, Robinson, Angelica Kauffman and Robert Fagan, the last of whom seems to have acted as their cicerone. Emma Hamilton had written from Naples to Angelica Kauffman introducing a 'Mrs Benton and Mr Abbot', and Angelica replied on 31 December saying they were 'very respectable persons', whom she would be happy to assist; her full-length portrait of 'Mrs Benton', dated Rome 1794, allegedly painted for 'her husband Henry Benton',1 was in a private collection in 1955. From Rome Sarah Bentham and John Abbot proceeded to Florence, where this time they stayed at Vannini's; though recommended, they found it inferior to both Megit's and the Aquila Nera (which was kept by Pio). Although Mrs Bentham was not a patron of the arts, she bought at 'Pisanis Manufactory of Alabaster' four vases and a Sleeping Venus. On 20 March they left Florence to visit Pisa and Leghorn, after which they made their way to Genoa and Turin. They had dined at Turin with John Trevor, the British envoy, whom they met again at Milan (just after his precipitate departure from Turin following the French invasion). At the end of April Mrs Bentham and Abbot left Italy.
Lord George Bentinck was in Padua with John Offley on 6 October 1737.1 In July 1738 with 'twenty English gentlemen' he was presented to the King and Queen of Sicily at Naples.2 In August with '3 other English Gentlemen' he sailed from Naples to Leghorn, the party arriving at Florence, via Lucca, on 28 August 1738.3 A fortnight later George Bentinck 'with other English Gentlemen' set out for Bologna.4 Stosch later told Horace Mann that 'Lord George Benting' had offered him £100 for his Gladiator statue.5
With his tutor Moses Bernege, Bentinck set off from Holland on 3 May 1726 for a two-year tour of Europe, his itinerary devised by the Comte de Wassenaer and financed by the Dowager Countess of Portland in England. Bernege sent her weekly reports in French, but Bentinck wrote irregularly.1 He was evidently an intelligent young man who spent much of his time abroad profitably.  In March 1727 he spent three weeks in Venice where he met the Duke of Beaufort, and at Padua he met Charles Hamilton, who accompanied him to Vicenza and Verona.2 Early in April he reached Rome, in time for Holy Week. The French ambassador, Cardinal de Polignac, proved most affable, offering his almoner as guide but Bentinck, wishing to avoid the summer heat, within two weeks moved on to Naples with two Hertfordshire gentlemen, Blount and John Boteler. Bentinck described a strenuous expedition up Vesuvius from the top of which 'large red-hot stones' were flying (28 Apr. 1727). In Naples he visited Count Schulenburg (an acquaintance from Hanover) and Mrs Cagnoni, the English wife of their banker, but he formed a low opinion of the Neapolitan nobility, while the 'common people' were 'the most lazy effeminate cheating, false and revengeful in the world' (23 May 1727).  Their return to Rome was considerably delayed because the Pope and Viceroy had engaged all available 'chevaux de Poste', but they had settled there by May. Masters in Italian and architecture were engaged to come for two hours every morning, while the antiquary Ficoroni came in the evenings from 5 o'clock to conduct him and his tutor round classical Rome. Bernege had taken the finest lodgings, an apartment of seven rooms of which Willem occupied three: a bedroom, a music room for the clavichord and a room for his guests and tutors. As well as frequenting Polignac, Bentinck became the protégé of Cardinal Colonna: 'c'est véritablement un spectacle curieux que celui de voir Mons. Bentinck qui joue du Clavessin et le vieux Cardinal qui l'accompagne de son violon' (6 Sep. 1727). Bentinck enjoyed Rome and in June 1727 was already appealing to extend his stay; 'jamais homme n'a tant aimé et tant recherché les Compagnies et les Sociétés des Etrangers que lui', wrote Bernege, who contrasted Bentinck, with his keen musical interests and his quickness in learning the language, with those other English travellers who banded together and criticised the Italians (18 Jun., 16 Aug. 1727).  On antiquarian matters Bentinck consulted the painter Vleughels (at the French Academy) and Baron Stosch (whom he had met in Holland); the latter accompanied Bentinck and his draughtsman in June 1727 to see the classical remains of Palestrina, and he also took care of their letters. The Cardinals Olivieri, Albani and Gualtieri showed Bentinck their collections (4 Jul. 1727). Bernege, a Huguenot, took care to keep Bentinck away from the Jacobites and after King George I's death Bentinck too adopted deep mourning, although his tutor was concerned over his association with 'Le P.F.' (17 Sep. 1727). In September Bentinck pleaded a further stay to see Cardinal Bentivoglio's entertainment to mark the birth of the Spanish Infante, but it was 'quite spoilt by a prodigious shower of rain, which wet all the fireworks; so that 5.000 Crowns he [Bentivoglio] had laid out for it were entirely flung away' (27 Sep. 1727). At the close of their stay in Rome, Bernege assured the Countess of Portland that they had met 'toutes les personnes de la première condition', except the Pope (16 Aug. 1727).  From Rome Bentinck went to Leghorn, where he met Lord Lovelace who became his favourite English companion. They had first met at Lunéville and Bentinck had already sent him £50 from Rome. They travelled from Leghorn to Florence, where they were presented, though not at a private audience, to the Grand Duke. With the Florentine nobility out of town for the season there were few assemblies to attend, but time was spent 'vastly better than expected' visiting the Grand Ducal collections and Bentinck was granted the unusual privilege of taking casts from antique gems. He learned in Florence of his election to the nobility in Holland, a change which 'will make me haste away home as fast as I can without neglecting any thing upon my way and shall be forced to shorten the time of my stay abroad' (9 Sep. 1727). He hurried slowly, visiting the courts of Modena and Parma on his way to Milan where he stayed two months. They paid daily visits to the Countess Borromeo, who in March took them on a tour of her palaces and of the Borromean islands on Lake Como. On 27 March 1728 at Turin Bentinck was received by the King of Sardinia, who paid him much attention during his six-week stay. From Turin Bentinck visited Genoa in April, against Bernege's wishes, but early in May they had left Turin for Geneva. On 27 May they met Charles Bentinck at Lausanne and Bernege conducted the brothers back through France.  Bentinck's free-spending habits in Italy ('l'ardeur et l'agitation avec laquelle il achette') were a concern frequently communicated to the Countess of Portland, but he explained to her (23 May 1727) that 'Antiquitys good and preserved as they ought to be, are not to be had by Strangers unless by chance, or some good luck of theirs, and even in those cases one must be upon his guard because of all the tricks that are played; so that I shall not meddle with them nor with Pictures; but there are a great many modern things as Books, Prints engraved stones &c in which I do design to lay out a little mony, and I beg that for the time I shall pass in Italy you would not take it ill if I should exceed the sum fixed to the value of an hundred pound more or less, because it is an opportunity I shall have but once'.  A box of books, engravings and music was duly sent from Rome to Leghorn in September 1727, but another was lost at sea. In July 1727 he bought 'le plus gros morceau de Calcedoine couleur de saphir que l'on eut encore vu à Rome'; he sent presents to England, a hundred and twenty nosegays from Mantua for his sisters and promised in April to have the best pictures in Rome painted for them upon fans (though in September he wrote that good fans were too expensive). As a present for his mother he sat to Rosalba Carriera (the portrait now untraced), the last of five sittings being on 21 March 1727; in April the picture was sent to England. It would 'always be worth something', Bentinck explained, adding that 'it will come in a little black frame with a glass over it. and must be left so, she herself desired me that it might be left just as it is because taking it out might easily spoil the Picture. and nothing moist must come near it' (28 Apr. 1727). News that the pastel had been safely received prompted further details on the sittings from Bernege: 'Nous avons vu chez elle des portraits de sa façon, qui sont fort ressemblants, quoyque celui de Mr Bentinck soit bon, il auroit encore été mieux s'il avoit eu ses cheveux, la Rosalba le querella fort de les avoir coupez, et elle a voulu lui rendre ses cheveux dans son portrait' (30 Aug. 1727). Bentinck later explained how 'to hide the cutting of my hair, which I did not think you knew, Rosalba gave me her colours, and all the hair upon the forehead, and close to the face are of my own painting, as much as I could remember my hair had been' (13 Sep. 1727).

Bentley set out in 1725 to consult manuscripts in Paris, Rome, Naples and Florence. Although largely concerned with collecting information for a projected edition of the Greek New Testament, he spent much time in Rome collating the Greek manuscripts of Plutarch, whose works he hoped to edit. On 3 November 1725 Stosch reported that Bentley had been in Rome for three days 'and intended staying several months 'pour confronter de certains auteurs classiques à la Bibliothèque Vaticane'.'1 Bentley commented that the Jacobite cause was then very low and Stosch's surveillance duties as a Hanoverian agent were scarcely necessary.2 While in Rome Bentley was caricatured by P.L. Ghezzi.3 At the beginning of December 1726 he was in Florence collating Greek manuscripts in the Laurentian Library.4




Elizabeth, Countess of Nugent, travelled under the name of her first husband as the Countess of Berkeley. She was accompanied by her daughter Lady Louisa Nugent. Notorious for her gallantries, the Countess's second marriage was at an end; Lord Nugent had disowned Lady Louisa, their second daughter, and Horace Mann, reporting their arrival in Florence in October 1778, reserved his most disparaging remarks for the Countess.1 On 17 November Mann noted the ladies' departure for Rome and Naples;2 Devereux Mytton saw her in Rome in November,3 and Sir William Hamilton confirmed their arrival in Naples on 5 January 1779 with Lord and Lady Maynard and the Bishop of Derry and his wife.4 Lady Hervey wrote that in Naples the Countess was 'in an agony to get away before the earth opens up and swallows up all this city which she is convinc'd will be the case'.5 When she returned to Rome 'she gave a ball, and many English absented themselves'6 and she maintained a feud with 'Lady Susan' [Lucan?].7 In March 1779 Walpole speculated on the Countess's activities at Naples, unaware that she had already left the city.6  Lady Louisa, meanwhile, was described by Martin Sherlock as speaking Italian and French, passionately fond of painting and a most accomplished singer; trained by Giuseppe Millico, 'I have seen her several times enchant the most critical judges of Rome and Naples', he said, going on to ennumerate her considerable physical charms.8
In June 1762 Norborne Berkeley asked Richard Phelps, the secretary of the British legation at Turin and an experienced tutor, to supervise his young relative upon his arrival. Phelps, reporting Lord Berkeley's arrival on 30 June, wrote that he regretted not having previously learned of his coming, 'for as I have been desirous of saving his Mony in all points that are proper, I have not yet taken his lodging at the Academy, tho' I have provided furniture and other necessaries for it'. Phelps was, however, able to reassure Norborne Berkeley that the British minister at Turin, George Pitt, 'desires me to tell you that he shall consider Lord Berkeley as your Son', and he gave assurances concerning the Academy; the King of Sardinia's nephew was then in residence and there was only one Englishman there ('who troubles himself so little about rules, that luckily his Lordship will not see him above two or three times a week').1  Lord Berkeley apparently spent two years at Turin. When Edward Gibbon met him (April/ May 1764) he thought him 'bon garçon mais un peu nigaud' (Berkeley nevertheless joined Gibbon's Roman Club when he returned to London).2 John Morgan and John Holroyd had seen him by September 1764.3 By 22 January 1765 Berkeley had gone to Naples.4 He was then in Rome, where he was painted by Batoni (Clark/Bowron 287; Berkeley Castle), and met by Sir William Farington at a dinner on 17 April.5 His visit to Florence probably occurred after his stay in Rome; in February 1765 Horace Walpole had told Horace Mann that Berkeley was expected at Florence,6 and he appears in one of Patch's painted caricature groups and as one of his set of etched caricatures.7  In the summer of 1785 Lord Berkeley planned to winter in Italy, but in November informed his sister Lady Craven that he would be unable to go.8
In 1713 George Berkeley was a junior Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, and a lecturer in Greek. He wanted particularly to visit Sicily, doubtless due to its Greek remains and Doric temples.1 The opportunity arose when he was invited to accompany Lord Peterborough as his chaplain to the coronation of Victor Amadeus II at Palermo in 1714. In the event Peterborough went on his own to Palermo, while Berkeley stayed four months in Leghorn; he was impressed by the lay-out of the port and by the British merchants whose style, he noted, seemed superior to that of the local aristocracy.2 He preached several times in the English chapel, the only place where English services were then tolerated. He also visited Florence, Pisa and Lucca, before returning to England on the death of Queen Anne in August 1714. He said that he had seen nothing that made him wish to live abroad: 'the descriptions that we find in the Latin poets make me expect Elysian fields and the golden age in Italy. But in my opinion England is the more poetical country.'3  His second visit, as tutor to the young St George Ashe, the fragile son and heir of the Vice-Chancellor of Dublin University, was the most extensive English tour of this period. Their exhaustive itinerary is contained in Berkeley's journals and letters-in addition to which they were noted in Naples on 19 March 1717 with Thomas Tyrwhitt and Compton Domvile,4 while Ashe and Domvile were later seen in Rome on 29 June 1718.5 In November 1718 Berkeley and Ashe, hearing of the Pretender's arrival, left Rome. It is not clear when they separated; they were both in Padua on 15 January 17196 and in Florence in July 1720; Berkeley was apparently back in Ireland that autumn, but Ashe stayed on the Continent and died in Brussels in 1721.7  The letters and journals record unprejudiced observations, and frequently contrast modern and classical Italy. In Rome Berkeley admired the Piazza del Popolo and the Pantheon but found no modern building that pleased him, 'except the wings of the capitol [Campidoglio] built by Michael Angelo and the colonade of Berninies before St Peter' and Bramante's Tempietto.8 In the remote Apulian town of Lecce, he admired the baroque buildings and found a satisfying architectural unity,9 but his long-awaited visit to Sicily immediately afterwards finally convinced him 'that the old Romans were inferior to the Greeks, and that the moderns fall infinitely short of both in grandeur and simplicity of taste'.10 Berkeley's taste in the fine arts was largely conventional; he thought Michelangelo's Pietà and the Raphael Logge were the best works of art in St Peter's11 and he admired Guido Reni and Perugino.12  Berkeley's interests were by no means confined to virtù. He was a close observer of society; critical of an idle Neapolitan aristocracy,13 curious about primitive banditti and disturbed by the poverty in the south, particularly in Puglia. He observed in Rome during Holy Week in 1718 that British Jacobites and Hanoverians frequented different coffee-houses.14 At Naples he saw an eruption of Mount Vesuvius, which he later climbed and studied; his description was later read to the Royal Society.15 In Sicily, where he witnessed an earthquake at Messina in 1718, he explored mountains and caves; he intended to compile a natural history of the island, but his notes were lost in the course of his travels.16  He bought terracotta and scaglione busts and bronze medals in Rome and Florence for Sir John Perceval, but he was unsuccessful in placing for him a commission with the medallist Massimiliano Soldani.17 For himself he bought prints and books (the Roman shops being disappointing, he bought more in Venice and Padua).10 One of several portraits of Berkeley by John Smibert was painted in Florence during his second visit to Italy, see Smibert.
Berkeley brought Theodore Baron de Neuhoff, 'King' of Corsica, to Leghorn in January 1743; he was again at Leghorn in September 1744 when he introduced Richard Gardiner, the self-declared natural son of Horace Walpole's brother Robert, to Horace Mann (Wal.Corr., 18:145, 507).
John Berkeley was in Rome on 18 January 1718.1 In April he was in Venice saying he would stay for the summer,2 and accompanied by a girl from Rome: 'I cant yet believe he has maried her', commented Alexander Cunningham: 'they write to me she is a cooks daughter'.3 On 29 April he was in Padua with Charles Ford, whom he had met in Rome.4
After travelling in France in 1735, Berkeley and his tutor George Barclay were in Padua on 27 October 17361 and in Rome by January 1737. Alexander Cunyngham met them several times in January and February and described 'Mr Barclay's governor who was of his name' as 'a worthy old man I knew formerly in Scotland'.2 Berkeley's accounts3 reveal he was still in Rome on 24 April; four days later he received a bill from Belloni, his banker at Rome, 'upon Signor Compagni & Libri at Florence'. From May 1737 to February 1738 he was receiving regular payments in 'Livers of Savoy', suggesting he may have been attending the Academy at Turin (as his nephew the 5th Earl of Berkeley was to do thirty years later). On 3 March 1738 Berkeley was exchanging money at Milan; by the 28th he was back in Turin where he stayed until May. He was possibly the 'Mr B. Barcklay' who exchanged 'comical' visits with George Sinclair in Turin between 22-26 April 1738.4 On 20 May 1738 he exchanged money at Venice, and by 18 June he was in Vienna.  On 25 June 1762 Richard Phelps, then secretary in Turin, told him 'Madame la marquise Pallas in your time, now Marquise d'Ormee desires her best compliments to you. Madame St Gilles wishes to see you here. They will eat up Lord Berkeley [5th Earl] upon your account'.5
Miss Windsor, who is very well married in Holland (I forget the name), is gone to Naples', wrote Lady Mary Wortley Montagu in Turin on 2 October 1741.1 On 26 November 'Monsieur and Madame Estevenon' were in Florence, where Horace Mann described them as 'a great awkward Dutch petit maître' and 'a little pert pretty patriot'.2



An Irishman named Bernard' arrived in Rome on 14 April 1729 and left for Florence on 8 December.1 'Fra. Bernard' was in Padua on or before 11 July 1730.2



Berners was in Naples on 17 May 1791 when Whaley Armitage met him; with Henry Tilson and [George] Graves he was planning 'to set out in a few days for Greece and Egypt; they have hired an English vessel for 3 months certain'.1 He was in Venice by 18 October 1792 with Tilson, and they left on 23 November.2 Some Berners family travel diaries of 1790-3 are in the Suffolk RO (HE7 2608).

Robert Berry, whose wife had died when their two children were very young, devoted his life to the education of his daughters Mary and Agnes (1764-1852). He was a diligent parent and in time his daughters' sense and accomplishments-Mary's Latin and fluent French and Agnes's competent water-colours-attracted the attention of the aged Horace Walpole. Their education had been completed through continental travel, Robert twice taking them to Italy, in 1783-4 and 1790-1. They were well liked abroad: Robert was 'a little merry man with a round face',1 and the sisters, 'very pretty English girls' were, for Charles Parker at least, also preferable 'to all the Roman Dames' in matters of conversation.2 Agnes was 'less animated' than Mary, 'but seems out of deference to her sister to speak seldomer', but they were devoted to each other.1 Mary's journals give a circumspect account of their travels.3  On their first tour they reached Turin on 21 October 1783 and fell in with an English party including the brothers William and Richard Assheton, Sir James Graham and the Rev. Thomas Brand, all of whom were following a similar route to Rome. After a week in both Genoa and Bologna, they arrived at Florence in mid-November, feeling ill but relieved to find letters and a good inn. 'Here', Mary remembered, 'for the first time I began to feel my situation, and how entirely dependant I was on my own resources for my conduct, respectability and success. My father, with the odd inherent easiness of his character, had since my mother's death entirely abandoned the world ... I soon found that I had to lead those who ought to have led me; that I must be a protecting mother, instead of a gay companion'.4  A month later they set out for Rome via Siena, arriving on 20 December. They were presented to the Pope and led a full social life, while paying serious attention to virtù. Raphael's stanze pleased Mary, but she observed that the room with the School of Athens 'has suffered most by time and ill-usage'; before Michelangelo's Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel 'one wonders, but is not charmed'. The Berrys encountered many artists, including Gavin Hamilton, Jacob More, James Durno and Henry Tresham.  Early in the new year they spent a month in Naples, where they watched the King and Queen perform in a ballet with the King of Sweden. More seriously, Mary reflected that Virgil's tomb probably contained 'much more ignoble ashes', for there was no 'satisfactory reason given for supposing this to be his tomb, and want of faith took away much of my enthusiasm in seeing it'. They returned to Rome for nearly three months, during which they were shown the antiquities by Giuseppe Bonomi who, as Mary wrote, had measured many monuments for Robert Adam. They saw the Capitoline Museum by torchlight, when 'every statue appeared much more beautiful than I had seen it by daylight'. In March they again met the King of Sweden who made great play of talking with them; 'I am sorry to say', wrote Thomas Brand, 'that these poor girls heads are turned by Princes & Kings. They mind a Baronet no more than a Link-boy'.5 Brand was exaggerating, for it was at this time that Mary met General Charles O'Hara, to whom she eventually became engaged. On 18 May she 'took leave of the Capitol and the Colosseum with Canova, the sculptor' and two days later the Berrys left Rome. They returned through Florence, Milan and Turin and were back in England in June 1785. Soon afterwards Horace Walpole described the girls as 'the best informed and the most perfect creatures I ever saw at their age'.1  Their second visit, undertaken in 1790-1 against Walpole's advice, was made to spend the winter 'between Florence and Pisa'. Mary's journal is incomplete and comparatively little is known of their activities (apart from reading many letters from Horace Walpole and Mrs Damer). They stayed just two days in Turin and in ten more travelled to Florence. At Parma Mary had time to reflect rather starchily that Correggio's 'boasted grace is to me affectation - has no simplicity, no dignity about it, and never touches me', and she appears to have been more interested in the impression of three hundred copies of the Horace Walpole's Castle of Otranto, just printed by Bodoni for Edwards, the London bookseller. After Modena, Bologna struck her as being 'dirty and dark', but 'a bustling place with more appearance of business and population than almost any other town in Italy that I know'. They reached Florence on 14 November, and again stayed at Megit's, but not for the winter, for reasons hinted at by Robert Berry (in a letter of 9 December to Bertie Greethead5): 'my daughters, not choosing to form any liaison with some of our countrywomen who happen to be here, ... nor to give offence by shunning their company, made us resolve to spend the three winter months [at Pisa] and to return to Florence in March'. Meanwhile at a ball given by Prince Corsini, Mary had danced 'the whole evening' with the 'happy and seemingly innocent country lads and lasses'. The Berrys passed four months at Pisa where they again encountered Thomas Brand; he thought the beauty of the Misses Berry 'on the decline' and alleged they had 'made the climate of Pisa the grand pretext for their second journey'.6 The summer of 1791 was duly spent in Florence. They did not stay to visit Rome and Naples, but left in September and were back in London on 11 November 1791.  The sisters lived together all their lives; in all they travelled five times to Italy, the later visits being in 1816-18, 1820-1 and 1822-3. Some of Agnes Berry's Italian scenes were later copied by Margaret Graves (water-colours now in WSL).



His portrait by Rosalba Carriera (priv. coll., Milan) is inscribed 'Norreys Bertie. Dipinto a Venezia 1738'. With his governor 'Briscowe' [Briscoe] he was in Rome in January 17391 and at Easter they were staying at or near the Casa dei Gesuiti.2 On 27 July 1739 Bertie was reported to have come from Rome to Florence.3 Bertie and his tutor reached Venice on 12 October, intending a brief stay.4 They were in Turin on 26 January 1740 when Lord Lincoln gave them a dinner.5
Having left the Navy by 1763, he travelled to Rome with his brother the 4th Earl of Abingdon, arriving by 7 February 1765.1 Two weeks later he and 'il Cavaliere Ivo'[?] were in Naples, applying for a passport.2 Back in Rome, where he stayed with his brother at Pio Dominici Coco's inn, Bertie and John Holroyd enlivened the Carnival by sending their dogs in a coach to the masquerade and attending them disguised as bears.3 From Rome Abingdon and Bertie moved to Florence, where Patch included Bertie in a caricature group (WSL). Sir William Farington had met the brothers in Rome on 1 April, and he fell in with them again in Florence at the end of May.4 On their return to England both became members of Gibbon's Roman Club.5 See also Willoughby, 4th Earl of Abingdon.
By 1727 Willoughby Bertie had stayed 'four or five years' in Italy 'upon account of his health', and had been closely associated in Florence with Sir John Collins, a Scottish Catholic 'who keeps a publick house in this town for the English Gentlemen that travel'.1 Bertie was perhaps the 'Mr Bertul/?Bertue' who went to S.Maria Nuova, Florence, in September 1722 with Richard Rawlinson.2 He was certainly introduced to the Grand Duke of Tuscany in 1725.3 It was said he went back to England with Collins in 1726/7, but he had returned to Florence by May 1727 to live with the Collinses, and 'at his villa in the country'. 'As he sees no manner of company but Collins & his wife & daughter [Anna]', Francis Colman reported, 'and the latter is very pretty, one does not know what may happen'; he suggested that the motive behind Bertie's forthcoming visit to Rome was 'to get a dispensation from the Pope for his marriage'.4 In October 1727 Bertie and the three Collinses left Florence for Rome and Naples, and by November he had married Anna, the ceremony 'performed in some part of Swisserland by a minister of the Church of England';5 although Bertie then had allegedly 'a very weakly decayed constitution' he fathered three sons and seven daughters.


Lady Berwick, a widow, set out from England with her three daughters, Henrietta Maria, Anne and Emily Hill. In October 1792 they were in Venice, leaving on the 13th1 to spend the winter in Naples. There they stayed at the Hotel Corcelli, where Robert Parker saw them,2 and where they were joined in December by her eldest son, Thomas, 2nd Baron Berwick. Henrietta became engaged to Lord Bruce, whom she married at La Quercia, just outside Florence, on 21 May 1793, attended by her mother and sisters, see Charles, Lord Bruce.  Lady Berwick and her two remaining daughters may then have left Italy, but by 13 November 1794 they were back in Turin, intending to go to Rome.3 They did not stay long in Rome, and by early December they were on their way to Naples to visit Henrietta, Lady Bruce.4 From July to November 1795 they were at Ratisbon, where they attracted the attention of Betsey Wynne. Lady Berwick was 'very amiable and gay', although 'some says she is a devil it may be but certainly has affects quite the contrary and is very kind to everybody', but her daughters did not pass muster. 'I dont care for them a pin, they never talk and looks so stupid as can be'; Anne was 'ugly and very plain', although Emily had 'a beautiful figure [and] seems much more aimiable than her sister'. On 11 November 1795 Betsey said Lady Berwick and her two daughters were about to return to Italy.5  Lady Berwick described their subsequent movements in a series of letters to Lady Bruce (Attingham MSS; dates cited in brackets). With her daughters she returned to Venice on 2 December 1795, and stayed over Christmas. She complained of the cold and a lack of company: 'there [is] not one English person here except Ly Herries' (23 Dec.), but at least Lady Knight was favourably impressed with Anne and Emily, calling them 'two beautiful and excellent daughters'.6 Lady Berwick sought a suitable son-in-law: Sir Richard Worsley was divorced, otherwise 'I was thinking he wd just do for A[nne] as she loves Venice so much & he is rather old than young' (11 Dec. 1795). But a few weeks later, Anne's only topic in a letter was music in Venice (1 Jan. 1796). Subsequent letters reflect the uncertainty felt by all English travellers at that time as the French advanced. From Milan Lady Berwick wrote (10 Mar. 1796): 'I am really like ye Iresolu in ye Play, I shall at last take a sudden resolution & be off for I have no soul to consult, there is no talking with Anne about England as you know, this place however I detest, & will leave as soon as I can without dying of ye cold on ye road'. By July 1796 they had settled in Naples, where other English travellers were gathering. Emily acquired a drawing master as Lady Berwick described (6 Jul. 1796): 'the moonlight man is much improved. I have got a little view of a well known spot for you if I can get it safe to England. Emily is learning of him, has done two pretty things'.  The following March, on her way back to England, Lady Berwick died and was buried at Manfredonia on the Adriatic coast (see Leveson Vernon). Lady Knight told Thomas Brand that 'Naples had disagreed with her. She amended at Rome, but mistaking kindness filld her breast with terrors and drove her back to Naples from thence she set out to get her children home, alass - the young Ladys were sent back to Naples and Sir W. Hamilton took them under his protection.'7 Emily and Anne remained in Hamilton's care at Naples until the arrival of their brother Lord Berwick. They were then escorted northwards, experiencing 'great imposition and impertinence in Piedmont', but arriving safely in Lausanne at the end of 1797.8 Emily and Anne were both to die unmarried in England.
Though hardly a British traveller, he is noticed as the illegitimate son of James II. He was first in Italy in 1698, 'merely for pleasure'; he returned in January 1701 as an officer in the French army, sent by James II on diplomatic business. His own son, the 2nd Duke of Berwick (1696-1738) was in Modena in 1711, Bologna in April 1727 and from 1734 was the Spanish ambassador in Naples, where he died.
Lord Berwick and his knowledgable near contemporary Edward Clarke travelled to Italy in 1792 with Henry Tufton (some five years their junior). By 15 October they were in Turin but, considering it uncomfortably close to the French, they promptly set out for Rome and Naples. They were in Rome in November 1792, and Berwick immediately set about commissioning works of art; he 'is employing Angelica Kauffman in painting, and I am now selecting passages from the poets for her to paint for his house at Attingham', wrote Clarke; 'he has left me to follow my own taste in painting and sculpture. I have ordered for him two superb copies of the Venus de Medicis and the Belvedere Apollo, as large as the originals; they will cost near 1000 £. In painting I have selected two passages from Euripides, to be executed by Grignion; Freedom, from Chatterton's Ode, by Angelica Kauffman; his portrait, and another allegorical painting by the same artist. The sculpture will be executed by an English artist [Deare], in marble brought from Carrara'.1 Later in Rome (April 1793) Sir William Forbes met Deare 'at breakfast at Lord Berwick's, who had given him a commission for copies of the Venus of Medicis, and the Apollo Belvedere at the price of £700. ... I saw Lord Berwick give him a draught on his Banker in London for one half the sum to begin with.'2 Deare remarked he had been preferred in spite of all Thomas Jenkins's attempts to promote Hewetson.3 Deare's Venus never reached England, being captured by the French en route, but his Apollo arrived safely, remaining at Attingham until the sale of 1827.  Lord Berwick reached Naples at the end of December 1792, meeting there his mother and sisters. He gave two balls, on 5 and 23 March 1793, possibly to mark the engagement of his sister Henrietta to Lord Bruce5 (they were married on 21 May at La Quercia), see Charles, Lord Bruce. Although Tufton may have left Naples on his own soon after the winter of 1793-4, (when Robert Parker saw him there4), Berwick stayed on until March 1794, increasingly attentive to Lady Plymouth. Lady Webster observed this growing attachment in May 1793; Palmerston called them Cymon and Iphigenia, for 'until their attachment began Ld. B. was never heard to speak'.6 On 30 September 1793 Berwick announced a scheme to travel in Egypt and the Holy Land, but it had been cancelled by December.7 Lady Webster saw him again in Naples early in 1794, observing that he then 'behaved shockingly to poor Ly. Plymouth: she is very unhappy. He speaks to her and of her with the most disrespectful familiarity'.8 Lord Berwick finally left Naples with Clarke on 29 March 1794 (Lady Plymouth left Naples the same month) and after spending the month of April in Rome they landed at Harwich on 8 June.9 For a further account of this tour, see Edward Clarke.  On the death of his mother in Italy in March 1797, Lord Berwick returned to escort his sisters home. He probably travelled out with his uncle Leveson Vernon. From Rome in November William Artaud noticed that, 'not discouraged by his former misfortune, [he] has purchased some very fine antique statues';10 on 9 November he bought two pieces from Pacetti (apparently a statue of Iris and a bust of a girl).11 See Leveson Vernon.  The cost of Lord Berwick's subsequent alterations to Attingham led to the sale of 1827 in which Deare's Apollo and other Italian acquisitions were sold, including an antique statue of Aesculapius and a candelabrum (both repaired by Deare) and a circular sarcophagus. A number of paintings survived however, testifying Lord Berwick's Italian patronage: grisailles of classical sculpture (some dated 1792-5) by Fagan (who also acted as his agent in Rome); Angelica Kauffman's portrait of Lord Berwick (1793), Cupid's Wound (1793) and Bacchus and Ariadne (1794); eight pictures by Philipp Hackert (1792-7), two views by Van Loo, one dated 1794, and a set of landscapes by G.A. Wallis, the artist with whom Lord Berwick had intended to travel to Egypt. After the sale Lord Berwick retired to Italy, where he died at Naples in 1832.
On 2 December 1711 Hugh Bethel was in Padua, and he was in Venice for the Carnival.1 In Rome in November 1712 William Kent reported that 'Mr Bethel of Rice' had 'bespoke one picture of every hand yt is famous'.2 Bethel was briefly in Paris before appearing again in Padua on 13 February 1713 (with 'George Somervaile') and in Venice four days later, arriving with Colonel Somerfield (presumably the same) and the 1st Marquess of Annandale.3 In June Kent noticed him in Rome as 'not very bright'.4 In July he was again in Venice.5 Bethel was enrolled at Padua University in September 1713 and September 1714 ('Ugo Betthel/Henricus Bethell Michaelis fils'), his name appearing in 1714 with those of William Kent and John Talman.6  Twenty-five years later Hugh Bethel returned to Italy with his close friend and contemporary Colonel James Moyser, an amateur architect and a fellow Yorkshireman.7 Their departure for Naples 'for the recovery of their health' was announced in August 1741.8 On 1 January 1742 Alexander Pope was writing to Hugh Bethel in Italy.9 It appears they went direct to Naples (where Dr Richard Mead had advised Bethel to stay); Bethel was still not well on his arrival, but Moyser recovered quickly.9 On 21/23 May 1742 Pope was concerned that Moyser was to leave Bethel, and another undated letter of 1742 indicates that Bethel had been at Viterbo and was to return there for the winter [1742-3].10 At Rome Bethel sat for his portrait for Pope (which he was to receive in February 1744).11 Moyser was in Florence in May 1742, dining at Horace Mann's 'three days together' with Sir William Codrington.12 In October 1742 Horace Mann, an old friend, wrote that Bethel 'though extreme ill passed by Florence to see me'; his health was very poor and he was 'going I believe to die at Venise, for I cannot think he will get to England. An asthma is his disorder, in regard to which he says he hates to go voiturin, but wishes to go post at least into the other world'.13 But two months later Mann was able to tell Horace Walpole that Bethel had been 'quite cured at Venise of his asthma'.14 He was back in England by the end of August 1743.15

The Catholic brothers John and Charles Biddulph were several times in Italy, although it is not always certain which was which. 'Biddulph' was studying at the English seminary in Rome under Charles Plowden in December 1769.1 'Mr Biddulph', intending to come to Rome in September 1775 for the winter months, had stayed in Florence and returned to England in March 1777;2 this was probably John Biddulph, who had asked Father Thorpe to visit him in England in May 1774.3  On 6 February 1785 in Florence Lord Grey de Wilton heard Nardini play at 'Mr. Biddulph's'.4 In July John Biddulph was one of Mrs Piozzi's circle in Florence.5 At the close of 1786, John's younger brother Charles had joined him in Rome for three days before they went on to spend Christmas at Naples. They were back in Rome by 10 Febuary 1787, two 'amiable and virtuous gentlemen', as Thorpe described them, who 'will remain with us untill near Mid lent.'6 They were well received by the Corsini family both in Rome and Florence (14 April), where they next went, delivering a silver figure of Christ to 'young Mr Hoare' [Richard Colt Hoare] for dispatch to Lord Arundell. Charles had meanwhile been seeking some artificial flowers requested by Lord Arundell's daughter.7 In August John stayed in 'his favourite residence in Tuscany' while Charles went to Milan (where the following spring he injured his foot).8 John was still in Florence in April 1788 and Thorpe reported that he had talked of returning to England that spring, 'where I much wish him to find a wife to his liking: for then she must certainly be a good & pious Catholick'.9 The brothers had intended to return together as far as Paris, but in November 1788 and on 14 January 1789 Thorpe reported he did not know where Charles was, and he assumed John was back in England 'looking out for a good wife'.10 On 8 June 1791 Thorpe wrote that 'according to last intelligence [Charles Biddulph] remains hidden in his hermitage at Nice'. It was probably John Biddulph who was in Venice in July 179511 and who encountered the Wynnes in Florence in 1796: in April that year 'Mr Biddulph' accompanied Betsey and her mother: 'a Catholic', wrote Betsey in her diary (29 April), 'very much esteemed by every body, he is about forty. Mama thinks him a saint and makes his praise to me all day long. I do not know to what purpose'.12 John however died celibate in Florence in 1835.
Biddulph was in Italy with [Henry or Joseph] Sheldon. When they left Florence in October 1726 Colman, the British resident, reported that 'there went from hence this week two English Roman Catholics for Rome, the one a young Gentleman of about 19 or 20, his name Biddal or Biddolph of Staffordshire, the other one Sheldon, a man between 40 & 50, who travels with him as a Governour, & is I believe a Popish Priest'.1 From Rome Stosch reported on 18 January 1727 that 'Biddal and Scheldon his Governor have arrived in Rome with a letter of Introduction to Dr Hayes [James Hay d. 1728] the surgeon to the Pretender'.2
Bigge was in Turin on 20 March 1764 when George Pitt, the British envoy, gave him a letter of introduction to Horace Mann in Florence.1 In February 1765 Bigge was in Rome with a letter of introduction from James Grant of Castle Grant to the Abbé Grant.2 He left for Naples on 8 March,3 and Wilkes, in a letter of 23 April, said he had left Naples for Rome.4 At Easter 1765 Bigge was staying with Godfrey Bagnal Clarke and Jameson near the Piazza di Spagna, and the three stayed together in Italy.5 On 2 April Bigge called on Sir William Farington; they dined together several times and once visited the painter Willison's studio.6 Bigge left Rome in mid-June, travelling to Parma with Clarke and a Mr Jameson, but he returned to Florence in August 1765 on his own.7 On his return to London, Bigge, with Clarke and Jameson, joined Gibbon's Roman Club.8
Mrs Billington left England early in 1794 with her first husband, her brother Charles Weichsell (a violinist) and his wife. Her departure may have been encouraged by the appearance of James Ridgway's scurrilous Memoirs of Mrs Billington in 1792, but officially she went to 'improve her taste' and develop as a singer.1 She made her stage debut in Naples at the Teatro S.Carlo on 30 May 1794 in an opera specially composed by Bianchi, but her immediate success was countered by the death of her husband the following day. An eruption of Vesuvius shortly after was popularly attributed either to the remarkable voice of the heretic Mrs Billington or the presence of the 4th Earl of Bristol.2 She stayed eighteen months in Naples, becoming a great friend of Emma Hamilton, who had her perform for Prince Augustus and Lord Bristol. In the autumn of 1795 she set off on a tour of the opera houses of Italy with her brother (who accompanied her on the violin and frequently conducted the orchestra). She was performing in Rome on 5 September,3 and arrived in Venice, via Florence and Rovigo on 20 September (with her brother and John Udny, the British consul at Leghorn).4 They were in Bologna in the spring of 1796. J.B.S. Morritt saw her in Venice in May or June 1796, just before the arrival of the French.5 A 'Madama Bilinton Inglese' was staying 'for some time' in Bergamo in August 1796.6 Undeterred by the French invasion, she was presented to Josephine Bonaparte in Milan in 1797. Soon afterwards she married again in Milan, a Frenchman by the name of Felissent or Felican, and they retired for a period to an estate she had bought, St Artien, between Venice and Treviso (and on her marriage her brother had returned to London). But her husband's brutality soon caused a separation and she resumed her career in London in 1801, astonishing her audiences with 'her wonderful execution'.7  By 1817 her husband persuaded her to return to St Artien, where she died the following year in suspicious circumstances.


Bindley had travelled from England to Turin with Louis Dutens, who sent a letter to Horace Mann in Florence by the hand of Bindley in August 1763.1 Mann, in turn, furnished him with a letter of introduction to Cardinal Albani at Rome in October.2 Bindley was in Rome by mid-January 1764,3 and was in Naples on 24 January.4 He passed through Capua on 21 February on his journey back to Rome.5 On 22 May 1764, James Martin visited Thomas Jenkins in Rome and was shown six pictures belonging to Bindley: an Apollo rewarding Merit & punishing Arrogance, two Madonnas - by Barocci and after Correggio, a bamboccianto alchemist, a Noli me Tangere by Pietro da Cortona, and a Landscape by Salvator Rosa.6 Bindley was back in London to receive his appointment to the stamp office in the Commission of Excise by 5 January 1765.7
Francis Bindon. Hibernus' was in Padua on 28 October 1716 travelling with Samuel Burton, also from Ireland.1 Bindon's obituary described him as 'one of the best Painters and Architects this Nation has ever produced ... a most Polite, well-bred gentleman and an excellent scholar which he improved by his Travels abroad'.2
John Morgan writing from Philadelphia on 24 November 1773 said Bingham had left America 'four months ago' and he had provided him with introductions to Rutherfurd at Leghorn and Jamineau at Naples.1 He was probably the 'Bilgham' listed in Florence on 22 June 1774.2



Edward Bird travelled in Italy with a fellow Catholic, Thomas Taylor. They arrived in Florence from Rome on 5 November 1733 with Henry Fermor and Constable.1 In March they travelled through Padua2 and Venice 'on their way from Rome to Paris'.3

On 12 May 1784 James Bird 'merchant at Leghorn' inherited 3,000 zecchini from his uncle, James Cleich, also an English merchant in that city.1 Lord Gardenstone met him in Leghorn in October 1787, describing him as a merchant at the Leghorn factory who had succeeded Mr Orr [presumably William Orr, who d. September 1786] in his business and had a Scots apprentice named Isaac Grant.2 In 1790 James and Charles Bird subscribed to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave. In October 1792 he spent a week in Venice with William and Elisabeth Mackay.3 In 1817, when James Byres was trying to trace some cases of pictures, Charles Irvine of Drum told him he had a letter from Bird which indicated that at Leghorn in about 1796 Bird had handed the cases over to one 'Beretti' (in order to escape confiscation by the French).4 He may have been the merchant Bird who in December 1796, with Littledale, was allowed to provision the British Mediterranean fleet from Naples.5
He was in Rome on 6 April when he was visited by George Waters and John Bellings;1 a Mr Bird had arrived in Venice by 26 June.2 See Francis Bird.
In 1728, when the Pretender and his court were at Bologna, Stosch reported that 'on Sunday 28th towards sunset Sir Toby Birk, Irish (whom the Spaniards call Don Tobia Burgo) arrived, in his equipage drawn by six piebald horses, accompanied by his daughter, two servants, 4 valets on horseback, a coachman and a postillion. ... Pretends that he went to Bologna to see a few old friends and that he had only come to Rome in order that his daughter would accomplish a vow she had made when she was 8 to the Madonna of Loreto when she was miraculously saved from shipwreck and from being made a slave of the Algerians. Sir Toby Birk suspected of being on secret mission from the Queen of Spain [to the Pretender and Vatican].'1 In Rome in December 1732 he was challenged to a duel by Shuttleworth, see William Denny.

Mr Birmingham, 'a very good humoured open countenanced Irish man', called on Elizabeth Gibbes in Siena on 1 May 1790, and a week later Mrs Birmingham, 'a very pleasing woman', also called; Mr Birmingham met Elizabeth Gibbes again in Pisa on 28 October.1 Mr and Mrs Birmingham were in Rome between 21 November 1791 and 23 February 1792, frequently meeting Ann Pitt (Lord Camelford's daughter);2 on 26 January Mr Birmingham met Mrs Flaxman at Francis Hare-Naylor's.3 They were twice in Venice in June and July.4 The 'Mlle de Birmingham' who sought permission to draw at the Uffizi in June 17925 may be associated with this same family. A 'Mad.a Bremingham con la Famiglia Inglesi' was in Padua on 12-13 April 1796,6 and a Mrs Birmingham with her two daughters was in Venice on 17 April 1796.7
Birtles was appointed British consul at Genoa in April 1740,1 and had already assisted his uncle, John Bagshaw, in the last year of his consulate, 1736-7. In July 1741 Horace Walpole thought him 'as unlicked a young cub as ever I saw',2 and he appears to have prompted Lady Mary Wortley Montagu to observe of English representatives that 'there is not one of them who know any thing more of the Country they inhabit than that they eat and sleep in it'.3 During the considerable disruptions during the War of the Austrian Succession, Birtles went to Leghorn. He was recorded there in 1745 with another merchant,4 and in 1747 Augustus Hervey found him 'now fixed as a merchant at Leghorn during the war and one of our agents'.5 In January 1749 Birtles was reappointed consul at Genoa.6 In 1755 Robert Adam noted that Birtles 'deals a little in the merchant way, is a great attender at the opera, being in the company of a Genoese lady of whom he is much enamoured and to whom he is Chichisbay'.7 He returned to England in 1755, to be replaced by James Holford.8


Bisset stopped at Venice in November 1720 en route to Leghorn with Col. James Otway; two days after his arrival he fell ill. Otway stayed a few days before continuing to Leghorn, but Bisset did not leave Venice until 24 January, when he set out for home, still not fully recovered (SP 99/62, ff.545, 561; Burges, 29 Nov. 1720, 24 Jan. 1721).

In December 1786 Sir Cecil attended the funeral of James Six at Rome1 and in March and April 1787 he and his wife both sat to Angelica Kauffman; the portraits were paid for on 23 April 1788 by Thomas Jenkins.2 Bisshopp purchased in Rome in 1787 a small relief of a Marine Venus by John Deare, which he 'brought home in triumph and set it at the head of the staircase of Parham' (DBS). It is not clear when the Bisshopps left Rome or Italy, but their daughter Harriet Anne was born at Geneva on 7 September 1787.
Black's journal of travels through Holland, Germany, Flanders, France, Italy and Spain in 1727-8 provides only the itinerary;1 he was in Padua on 4 August 1728.2
In 1736 Richard Pococke was told how Black 'a protestant minister in London ... having been guilty of some crimes ... was forced to fly, went to Florence, leaving his wife in London who had some fortune ... he sent for her to come with her cash for that he was to have a place of 500 pr. An. under ye Pretender, she came, he went to Rome under ye name of Smith, wanted to get a Pension of the Pope to turn again, but disappointed & having spent all, his wife came to London, he went to Spain, was put to the inquisition'.1  He may be identified as 'Monsu Smy Inglese Heretici' in the Strada Felice in Rome in April in 1731.2 On 10 August 1731 Neil Brown, the British consul at Venice reported: 'Here is one Mr Smith, who is lately come from Rome, and intends to return thither again and spend the next winter there, as he tells me. He saies he's of the Bishoprick of Durham, and has been out of England about eighteen months and twelve of 'em in Italy. He affects to pass for a great Virtuoso ... I remember to have seen him often about London'.3 He was probably 'Il Cav. Smith Inglese uomo assai erudito e amantissimo delle antichita', the subject of the caricature by P.L. Ghezzi dated 1733 (Vatican library). He was in Genoa by 11 July 1733 when the consul, John Bagshaw, described him as 'Mr Smith a Gentleman lately come from England has abjured his Religion he pretends to have had great Losses by the Charitable Corporation',4 but by the time he reached Florence, the truth was out: 'On the 20th September arrived here one who calls himself Lewis Smith with his wife and two small sons, she a pretended sister of Sir Harry Gough, but said to be an Inn Keepers daughter; he ... such a composition of infidelity, Religion, Vice, rattle, literature, poverty and affectation of riches, that I must conclude him to be either a Vagabond desperate wretch, or disguising himself under these various colours in order to carry on some deep design'.5 Stosch, reporting Black's arrival in Florence from Genoa, said he called himself a former chaplain to the King, and in October reported Black had started to pay visits to Cardinals Corsini and Ottoboni, 'boldy [saying] everywhere that he was a bishop in England'.6 It was even reported he had been a 'Spy to the Bishop of London over the inferior clergy'.7 Black was in Rome in October when he and his wife called on Martin Folkes, who was shocked by his imprudence and, afraid of any association with Jacobites, resolved to avoid him.8 Black's overtures to the Pope met with failure, and in January he was banished from Rome. 'Cardinal Imperiali allows them a pension of ten Crowns a month', consul Skinner wrote from Leghorn; 'two little children they have with them and an English servant maid they had is cast upon the charity of the travelling Gentlemen at Rome'.9 On 27 March 1734 Stosch reported Black and his wife had passed through Civitavecchia to Genoa 'en fort pauvre Etat'.10

A 'Blackburn painter from Norwich' came to Rome in 1760.1 John Blackburn, 'Pittore Inglese' shared an apartment with Gavin Hamilton and John Day near the Piazza di Spagna in 1762.2 He was probably the 'Giovanni Branbuon Inglese -Proteste - Pittore -20' listed in the parish of S.Maria del Popolo in 1764 and 1765,3 and doubtless the 'young man lately come from Rome & who studied there for several years [whose] name is Blackburn', who was refused employment in 1772 as a draughtsman for the stained glass at New College Oxford.4

Much of the evidence for Blackburne's tour lies in an interleaved and annotated copy of Rossini da Pesaro's Il Mercurio errante della Grandezze di Roma [1741], signed by Blackburne and dated 1748/9 on the fly-leaf (coll. RBF). The annotations suggest he had seen all the monuments described, in Rome, Tivoli, Frascati, Albano, etc., and that he had also been to Naples, where the equestrian statue of Balbus at Portici 'not onely equals but in my opinion vastly excells [the Marcus Aurelius in Rome]'. He is stated to have made 'a rich collection of medals and coins' during his time abroad (W. Beamont, Hale and Orford, [1886], 236).
Blackden visited Thomas Jones in Rome in March/April 1778 and commissioned from him a view of the falls at Tivoli; the painting was started in August 1778 and Jones listed the commission in April 1779.1 At Christie's, 3 June 1803, a collection of chiefly Italian pictures formed on the Continent and in England by B. Blackden Esq. of West Wycombe, also included some 'very fine antique marbles purchased in Rome'.
Blackett commanded The Great Duchess of Tuscany which sailed for London from Leghorn in February 1784. On 21 February, off Corsica, 'three Sclavonians' mutinied and took command of the ship. Captain Blackett went ashore to get help, leaving his wife ('a young woman about eighteen years of age') and maid with his passenger young William Astley. Blackett arrived in Leghorn and was 'hissed whenever he appears abroad' wrote Horace Mann; his ship was recovered off Zante in April.1 Mrs Blackett was in Naples in January-February 1785, see Capt. John Blankett.
William Blackett's tour is partly described in fourteen letters to his father dated between 4 January and 16 June 1785 (Blackett letters MSS), from which his itinerary is taken. 'Blackit' was noticed at Turin on 13 October 17841 and was then presented at Court; on 20 October he was with Sir James Hall in Bologna.1 In Florence he acquired three crayon pictures from H.D. Hamilton: his own portrait ('he takes the strongest likenesses ever I saw'), copies of Raphael's Madonna della sedia and 'a fine picture' by Dolci.  He went on to spend two months in Naples where he met Sir James Douglas, the consul, Lady Clarges, Lady Hampden and the 10th Earl of Pembroke, as well as his unfortunate namesake Mrs Blackett (see Captain William Blackett). Neapolitan society, from the King to the lazzaroni, offended him with its vulgarity and ignorance; he saw a man stabbed in front of his window and commented that 'the streets are so full of these rascals that in the day time you are obliged to walk with your hands in your pockets[;] if you offer to make any resistance ... they whip a knife into you immediately'. His presentation at Court by Sir William Hamilton with more than twenty other English was not impressive: 'the King never speaks to any presented[,] you stand round the table while he & the Queen are at dinner'. Later he attended a Grande Chasse given by the King who gave each stranger a wild boar. In Rome he stayed at Margherita's with Mark Davis, Richard Myddelton and a Mr Hesketh with their tutors. They took turns to give dinners near the Piazza di Spagna, and Blackett described playing whist with Lord Hampden, Lord Downe and the Welldons (who became his particular friends). He was entertained by Cardinal de Bernis, 'a very plain honest kindly man [who] looks like an Engl. Justice of peace'. He followed a six-week course of antiquities every day from ten o'clock till past three, which was cheaper, at a sequin a week, than those given by James Byres, which were thirty. Rome, however, was expensive, and he intended 'to go no further than some prints & drawings & perhaps a cameo'. He sent his sister some shell bracelets made by the best workmen in Rome. Thomas Jenkins told him that, although there were more English in Rome than he could remember, yet there was not a third of the money being spent that there used to be, so that 'the artists here await for our arrival just as we do in England for a flight of woodcock'. Blackett thought the English superior in painting, Jacob More and Gavin Hamilton 'being the best landscip & history painters'. He commissioned a dozen drawings from More, believing that 'after his death his landscips will be nearly as valuable as Clauds'. After passing Holy Week in Rome he moved on to Venice to see the Ascension Day festivities. In Venice he was again with Davis, as well as a Mr Sumner and a Mr Dumbleton whom he had met in Naples. On 29 May he was in Mantua, thence to Milan (where the Emperor of Austria, Joseph II, unexpectedly arrived to meet his brother, Peter Leopold, the Grand Duke of Tuscany). Blackett made an excursion to the Borromean Islands before proceeding to Turin. He intended staying with the Welldons in Switzerland during the summer, and seeing Vienna on his return journey.

Writing in 1705, John Macky described Blackwell as having been bred 'a Merchant, and lived as such many Years at Leghorn. His long Acquaintance with the Court of Florence, and his Knowledge of the Affairs of Italy, first recommended him to King William, who made him Envoy to this Duke, and to the State of Genoa, at the Time when the Partition was in Agitation. He affects much the Gentleman in his Dress, and the Minister in his Conversation'.1 Having resided in Leghorn as English consul to the Tuscan Court between 1689 and 1696, Blackwell came back to England for two years.2 In 1698 he returned to Italy, both knighted and married.  As English envoy he received an audience in Florence from the Grand Duke in May 1698, having meanwhile accomplished in January a mission of compliment to Genoa, on that city's recognition of William III of England. Blackwell remained based at Florence through the next seven years, though he was absent on several occasions. He was in England between January 1701 and March 1702 (when Thomas Dod, his secretary, deputised for him); in February 1702 he was made envoy extraordinary to Venice where, however, political disturbances prevented him staying more than a few days in March, and he was in Genoa from September 1702 to February 1703. His diplomatic position was never particularly happy. In 1702 a petition from twenty-two British Leghorn merchants had supported another candidate for the consulate, and in 1704 a second rival candidate appeared (see John Burrows).3 In April 1704 after the Plowden incident (see William Plowden), Blackwell had to advise the British Factory at Leghorn to cease trading in Tuscany,4 which led to their Petition to Queen Anne (1704) and to the hostility of foreign merchants.  Throughout his stay in Italy Blackwell maintained his private interests as banker and merchant. For some years he owned a large painting by Luca Giordano containing 'above thirty figures' which had come into his possession in his capacity as banker to the 4th Earl of Kingston-who had commissioned the picture in Italy in 1687 but had died in 1690 before it was complete; it was reclaimed by the 5th Earl.5  Blackwell's recall came in November 1704 and he left Florence on 23 May 1705, following a lavish three-day entertainment in February.6 Before she left, Lady Blackwell sold her diamonds (and subsequently invested the proceeds in the South Sea Company, of which her husband became a Director); in October 1704 the Duke of Shrewsbury had been asked to be godfather to the child she was expecting.7
John Blackwell senior and Thomas Blackwell, both of Leghorn, owed Sir Lambert Blackwell money in 1720.1 A Thomas Blackwell died on 31 August 1747 at Leghorn.2
Blagden had been to Geneva in 1788, pursuing his geological interests, and he returned in 1792 when travelling in Europe with his old friend the 2nd Viscount Palmerston.1 Blagden was with the Palmerstons throughout the winter and in Rome in April and May 1793, though they often took separate excursions. Blagden left them briefly in May 1793 after the second visit to Rome, but rejoined them at Milan, where he had 'just arrived' with Count Rumford on 18 June. He may have been the 'Mr Blagde' in Venice on 20 July 1793.2 Blagden left the Palmerstons in Switzerland in August, to return alone to England where he was observed looking 'ill and much emaciated' in October.3 He subsequently recovered. His travel diaries and letters belonging to the Royal Society have been partly published (Blagden Jnl. and Blagden Letters).
Blagrove made a grand tour on leaving Cambridge. He arrived in Venice on 9 November 1773.1 On 12 January 1774 Blagrove, with Sir William Cunynghame and Steddy Grinfield, gave 'una magnifica e sontuosa festa di ballo' in Siena.2 Sometime in 1774 he sat to Batoni in Rome (NG Jamaica; Clark/Bowron 372).


Dr Blair travelled in Italy with the Jacobite Earl of Panmure, and his factual travel journal survives.1 They stayed five weeks in Rome, where Blair listed the three most famous paintings in any Roman church as The Descent from the Cross by Daniele da Volterra in Trinita dei Monte, Raphael's Transfiguration in S.Pietro in Montorio, and Domenichino's Communion of St Jerome in S.Girolamo della Carita. They spent seven months in Urbino where the Stuart court then resided and were listed among the Jacobites in Italy in December 1717.2 They had a perilous journey from Urbino to Fossombrone: Lord Panmure was carried in the Archbishop of Urbino's litter between two mules, rather than venture in his chaise but, as the litter could only carry one, Blair went the longer route in the chaise, arriving in Venice on 16 February 1718. There he described the Carnival displays of the 'Forces of Hercules' and 'the boy sliding down the rope'. They left Venice on 24 February, passing swiftly through Milan and Turin into France via Mont Cenis. The journal ends at Fontainebleau on 19 March.
He was performing in the ballet Artaxerxes at the S. Carlo theatre in Naples in the summer of 1779: 'an Irishman, who went abroad very young, and had become a fine pantomime actor, and was considered the best grotesque dancer of his day' (Kelly, Reminiscences, 1:45).



Blankett was a naval officer distinguished by the favours he received from the courts at Florence and Naples, and by his ability as a linguist (in French, Italian and Portuguese). In March 1784 he spent six weeks searching unsuccessfully for The Great Duchess of Tuscany which had been captured by pirates with Lady Astley's youngest son William and two English women on board (see Capt. William Blackett). In August 1784 Lady Knight wrote that 'he has had the great fortune of being a great favourite with the Emperor, the Grand Duke of Tuscany, and the King and Queen of Naples. He is at present at Leghorn'.1 The King of Naples is said to have presented him with his portrait set in diamonds (DNB). In April 1785, when he was described as Captain of the Thetis, he was seeking permission to view manuscripts at Capodimonte.2 He was then to take the Neapolitan Court to Leghorn, after which the 10th Earl of Pembroke intended to sail with him to Gibraltar; in August Blankett took the Court from Leghorn to Genoa, and Pembroke sailed with him back to Naples in September; in October Blankett was chasing pirates in the seas round Malta.3  He was possibly the Captain John Blackett who subscribed to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave in Leghorn in 1790, and possibly the 'Vice Ammiaglio Placher' in Milan and Verona in May 1796.4

With several other members of the British Factory at Leghorn, he signed a memorial in May 1744.1 He was presumably the Lewis Blaquiere who died in Leghorn on 3 August 1754, aged 32, and who was buried in the Protestant cemetery.2


William Blathwayt travelled with his younger brother John and a tutor Henry de Blainville, a man of considerable learning, who ensured his young charges both enjoyed and improved themselves. When they left for the Continent in January 1705, their father requested weekly reports and detailed accounts of their expenses (which have survived)1 and de Blainville kept a formal journal, published in 1743.2 John, who set out on his tour at the age of fourteen, was already a prodigy on the harpsichord; his father asked him to form a collection of music and to consider composing a new Te Deum in the style of Purcell to present to the Queen on his return. William was more withdrawn and less talented; he preferred Italian comedies and drawing to opera and learning languages, and he suffered from 'contortions of the head and convulsions of the nerves', though with less frequency as the journey progressed.3 They travelled to Italy down the Rhine to Geneva. Their arrival was delayed by William's illness, but they had reached Padua by December 17064 and the following February they were in Venice with the Carnival at its height. They were well-treated by the Italian friends of Mr Blathwayt, who gave them the keys to their boxes at the opera. De Blainville noted how John was charmed, crying louder than the others at the most beautiful parts, while William liked the comedy best. At first de Blainville tried to avoid the other young Englishmen in Venice, and particularly the 7th Earl of Dorset who, however, he eventually came to respect (11 Mar. 1707). They travelled to Rome via Bologna and Ravenna, avoiding northern Italy which was still full of marauding bands of French soldiers. De Blainville was taken ill en route and in Bologna he called the young men to his bed to give them instructions in the event of his death; but he recovered enough to reach Rome on 20 April for the Easter celebrations. They took lodgings with Charles Browne, a Scottish innkeeper. They then spent some time in the countryside around Rome, particularly Civita Lavinia: 'the Gentlemen Blathwayt have been so charmed with it that they were quite Ecstatic about it' (14 May 1707). They had lessons in Italian and arithmetic, and their father had also asked for instruction to be given in architecture and painting; James Gibbs was very probably the architect who taught William, while John had lessons from the composer Pasquini. De Blainville claimed he could not find anyone to teach painting, but hoped the paintings they would see under the guidance of books by Félibien and Aglionby (which they were to be lent), would make up the deficiency. They sat to Edward Gouge, whose receipt for the portraits is dated Rome, 27 September 1707, see Gouge. On Wednesdays they attended concerts in the Palace of Cardinal Ottoboni, and Gouge wrote from Rome on 18 June 1707 that 'they have every Friday a concert very fine at Mr Brown's [where the Blathwayts rented their apartment]. The performers are Pauluci, Nicolini, Pipo, that famous bas violist and two other violins; Mr Blathwayt and Mr Cope likewise, one with the harpsichord, the other the violin, make no small figure in this concert'.5 De Blainville visited the catacombs alone with an antiquary (the young men could not be persuaded to go), and 'caused certain Tombs to be opened where we have found some remains of Bodies quite complete, which fell to dust as soon as we Touched them' (4 Jun. 1707). They visited Naples in September, where the Duke of Spezani acted as their host and guide, conducting all conversations in Latin. They returned briefly to Rome before setting out at the beginning of November for Siena and Florence, where copies were made of the Gouge portraits (which had been admired by the Grand Duke) for a M. d'Arzelliers. They were several weeks in Florence, and as it was too late to cross the Alps, decided to spend the exceedingly wet winter in Milan and Turin: the former was very lively, with all-night concerts and balls twice a week, while the Court at the latter was 'no longer what it was formerly', the atmosphere sad, the city extremely expensive, and the Academy closed, all due to the recent siege. But Turin slowly filled with young English waiting to cross the Alps. De Blainville had meanwhile received two delayed letters from the boys' father, informing them by which route he wished them to return home. De Blainville replied explaining that they were to travel with Sir Thomas Samwell and his French tutor, with whom they would share costs. They finally left Turin for Geneva on 7 April 1708. Samwell, who was also an amateur musician, had persuaded an Italian musician to return with them, and the three played trios which were admired by their hosts throughout Europe.

George 'Bley' was admitted Doctor in Padua University on 3 October 1768;1 he was presumably the George Blay who, on 23 January 1773, was granted permission to make and dye cotton and linen in Pisa with William Adey.2 George Blay MD died in Leghorn on 18 April 1804.3
John Bligh was in Turin by September 1739 and was again noticed there in January 1740 with William Gage and Walter Chetwynd.1 He was in Rome on 30 April 1740 when he wrote to his brother Edward, the 2nd Earl of Darnley, thanking him for the £200 he had just received; he had incurred a large number of debts meanwhile and asked for more funds immediately to last him the rest of his stay, since he must leave Rome very soon to avoid the 'Mala Aria'; he intended not to settle long in any one place, and described Rome as full of his own countrymen (which made everything 'excessively dear') all waiting to hear news of the election of a new pope; he only briefly mentioned the antiquities of Rome before stating he wished he had come to Rome sooner and had more time there before being driven away by the summer heat.2 He was in Florence by 15 July with Chetwynd and on 5 November Samuel Dashwood wrote that 'Mr Blyth is still here deeply engaged with an Opera Dancer, he talks of leaving us in about a weeks time, He spends his Carnival [Jan. 1741] I think at Turin, where she is to dance.'3 The dancer was later identified by Horace Walpole as 'the Chiaretta' [who] 'would not do on the same stage with the Barbarina. I don't know who will be glad of her coming, but Mr Blighe [sic] and [Angelo] Amorevoli [the tenor].'4
Bligh was in Venice in the spring of 1785 with Dumbleton; together they went on to Mantua, intending to proceed to Milan and Turin, see Dumbleton. This was presumably the Tom Blighe who in about June 1785 sent some things home in a packing case shared with the painter Solomon Williams, see Solomon Williams.
A 'Mr Bliih' was listed in Rome on 12 December 1791.1 A Mr 'Blai', with 'Brod'[?] and 'Cropel'[?], inglesi, was also listed in Venice on 16 May 1792, and a 'Bligh' from 16 April to 2 June.2
Following the death of his first wife, Sir John set out on his travels in May 1766. On 30 March 1768, Robert Grimston wrote from Rome that he and Sir John Blois had made 'all the tour together', and that he would leave Sir John at Naples1 (see Grimston). On 3 September 1768 Charles Townley met Sir John with a Mr Bohun in Venice; on the 7th they set out for Turin and when Townley met them there near the end of the month he found Sir John had been ill since his arrival.2 The date of his return to England is not known.




A Blount of Hertfordshire travelled from Rome to Naples with John Boteler, of the same county, and with Willem Bentinck and his tutor Bernege; they left Rome on 19 April 1727 and were in Naples by the 25th. They had all spent six months at Necker's Academy in Geneva (Bernege letters MSS, f.463).
Lady Blount and her son were part of 'a distinguished show of Catholics' in Rome noted by Father Thorpe on 12 December 1789.1 Her son was presumably her eldest, Walter (b. 1768; there were two younger sons, Edward, b. 1769, and George, b. 1771). Elizabeth Gibbes attended a dance at Lady Blount's on 11 February 1790.2 On 24 April Thorpe wrote that Lady Blount 'and family went from hence in the beginning of last week to pay their devotions at Loreto on their way to Venice';1 they arrived in Venice on 30 April (Lady Blount with her nephew or niece, and son) and left on 8 May.3
Blundell came from a landed Catholic family and had devoted much time to his estates in Lancashire before first going to Italy, already over fifty years old and a widower.1 He then became a considerable collector of antiquities, an activity in which he was much encouraged by Charles Townley, a fellow Catholic and Lancastrian. Much of their correspondence is preserved2 and it reflects a relationship which was not always harmonious. On this first visit to Italy Blundell set out late in 1776 to join Townley in Rome. It has been said they travelled out together, but Blundell was writing to Townley from Turin on 10 February 17772 describing his intended route to Rome as via Milan, Venice and Ancona. He arrived there at the end of February and the following month left for Naples with Townley. Blundell visited Pompeii and Herculaneum and bought some Greek vases and Vesuvian marble table-tops from Tomaso Valenziani (the assistant of Camillo Paderni, Keeper of the Royal collection in Naples). Blundell also acquired paintings by Gavin Hamilton and Mengs, views of Vesuvius by Volaire and old master copies by James Smith ('Smith of Parma'). Of old masters, he acquired from Ignazio Hugford (presumably in Florence) a version of Veronese's Marriage at Cana.3 The first classical sculpture he purchased came from Thomas Jenkins in Rome in 1777, the statuette of a philosopher (Epicurus) 'much recommended' by Townley. Blundell went on to buy from Jenkins en bloc some eighty of the statues remaining from the Villa Mattei, and a group of antiquities from the Villa Borrioni; in both instances he was buying what was left, the best pieces having already been sold. Seven more pieces came from the Palazzo Capponi, and Blundell also bought a group of heavily restored busts and statues from Cavaceppi (Blundell's interest was primarily in the form represented), a restored and reconstructed tazza from Piranesi (engraved as the frontispiece for the second volume of Piranesi's Vasi), and modern copies from Albacini and Angelini.  Although he had been greatly assisted in Rome by Thomas Jenkins he came to regard him as expensive and manipulative. This opinion was shared by Father Thorpe, Blundell's contemporary who had also attended the Jesuit College at St Omer in the 1740s, and who now became a constant friend. He obtained for Blundell five paintings by Carlo Labruzzi, commissioned in Rome by the Duke of Gloucester but left unfinished.4 In April 1777 Thorpe wrote that Blundell had had an audience with the Pope and had just left Rome,5 but Blundell was still there on 16 September 1777 when he inscribed a copy of Elegantiores Statuae Antiquae (Walker AG, Liverpool). Blundell subsequently received a set of marble-topped tables from the Pope.6  Blundell was in Italy on three further occasions. He was at Rome in December 1782, and on 2 February 1783 he was leaving for England 'the next day'.7 He returned in 1786, when Townley wrote in advance asking Jenkins to help him. Blundell was writing to Townley from Rome on 15 February, and Jenkins noticed that Blundell was treating him with reserve. But it was on this visit that Blundell acquired from Jenkins his most famous piece, the Athena from the Palazzo Lante. In April he called on John Deare who had been working on a model for him the previous November.8 In April, with the help of Father Thorpe, Blundell acquired from Carlo Albacini (Cavaceppi's pupil) a life-size Diana from Gordian's Villa. Writing to Townley early in 1787 Blundell referred to his having been 'in quest of Virtu this time last year', and as having 'looked over all ye articles at Volpato's [Giovanni Volpato, Piranesi's former associate] you mentioned in a letter to be worth my notice but I found their restors horrid.' He also placed a commission with John Deare, with whom he dined in Rome on several occasions.9  His fourth and last visit to Italy was in 1790 when he spent his time in Rome and Naples. He patronised Canova, commissioning a Psyche (1789-92; priv. coll.), for which he paid considerably more (about £300) than he is known to have paid for any antiquity; he also acquired a terracotta Madonna and Canova gave him the plaster model for Theseus and the Minotaur. Blundell bought twelve marbles from the Villa d'Este, including a fine Theseus, and from the collection of Niccolo La Piccola, keeper of the Capitoline collections who had just died in 1790, he acquired the Satyr and Hermaphrodite, a piece coveted by Townley. Blundell was back at Ince by January 1791. Blundell described himself, disarmingly, as a 'dabbler' in antiquities, but he had acquired nearly six hundred pieces (including gems, mosaics and glass), and the scale of his collection forced him to build for their display a garden temple (completed in 1792) and a pantheon (built 1801-10) in the grounds of Ince Blundell Hall. In 1803 he published an Account of his collection, not meant, he wrote, for the eyes of the 'learned antiquarian'. Townley, who had encouraged him with the production of the Account and who was the more professional antiquarian of the two, found Blundell 'irresolute, capricious, and unintelligent', and thought there were only five or six marbles in Blundell's massive collection of any real worth,10 though this was probably a temporary outburst. Much of Blundell's collection of antiquities now belongs to the National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside, with some pieces still in Ince Blundell Hall, but most of his eclectic collection of pictures was dispersed at Christie's in 1980 (12, 18 Dec.), 1991 (12, 19 April) and 1992 (3 Apr.).

There was a Father Bodkin in Rome in 1760,1 but in 1792, when he was a priest at S. Isidoro, Valentine Bodkin, said to be aged forty-five, affirmed that he came to Rome twenty-six years ago [i.e. 1766].2 On 10 October 1785 he applied for permission to export to Ireland from Rome 'about twenty four' modern pictures.3 Between 1785 and 1792 'a macaronic sort of person who travelled to and fro, an Irish priest living in Italy called Abbé Bodkin' was used by some Norfolk collectors to import books and prints from Italy.4 Henry George Quin met him in Rome in January 1786,5 and in 1792 he witnessed the marriage of the artist Alexander Day.2 In 1795 the Abbé MacPherson wrote to the Rev. 'Bodgin' at Rome concerning Hippisley's attempt to get National Superiors.6
Bohun came from Turin to Florence, where he was staying at Hadfield's in December 1767; in February 1768 he was in Rome with Arcedeckne.1 They arrived in Venice on 20 August (Bohun then listed as 'Giovanni Bon')2 and Bohun accompanied Sir John Blois in Venice and Turin in September. On 3 September Charles Townley walked in St Mark's Square with Bohun and 'came home in his gondola'; four days later he called on Blois, Bohun and Arcedeckne and observed that Bohun was setting out for Turin; on 26 September Townley called on Blois and Bohun at Turin.3
Separated from her husband, Lady Bolingbroke lived for some years at Pisa with her three young children, her father and her sister. Her father had been her husband's tutor, and her marriage to Lord Bolingbroke had been short-lived. Several visitors encountered her in Pisa. Count Rumford met her in November 1793 at Mariana Starke's and at her own lodgings; 'I found her with her father, a Lady who I did not know [presumably her sister] and three charming children. Poor thing how interesting she is in her present unfortunate situation. I felt quite grieved for her'.1 Sarah Bentham met her in March 1794;2 Lord Longford found her living 'very retired' in November 1794,3 and Captain William Cochrane saw her there with her father and sister in January 1795.4 Lady Bolingbroke's circumstances were rendered more tragic by the illness of her eldest son George (d. 1803), whom Lady Berwick described as 'dying by inches'.5 'Miledi Bolinbruch' arrived in Venice on 1 June 1796, from Vicenza.6 She died in Bristol in 1803.
Lord Bolingbroke travelled with his tutor, the Rev. William Fraigneau. They were in Capua on 20 April 1753 on their way to Naples.1 They came to Florence in July,2 but Bolingbroke had left by the end of the month. By December he was in Rome (Bubb Dodington had given him a letter of introduction, dated before April 1753, to Cardinal Albani3). Bolingbroke had commissioned several busts from Simon Vierpyl4 and he was apparently one of a party who attended Richard Wilson sketching in Tivoli in 1754,5 though he is said to have taken his seat in the House of Lords on 12 February 1754 (CP).

Bolton travelled with John Holroyd and Major Richard Ridley. They set out for Turin from Lausanne on 7 July 1764,1 and reached Florence on 15 September, dining with William Guise and Edward Gibbon the following day.2 James Martin saw them in Rome on 28 October.3 At Naples the following spring Bolton contracted consumption, and he died at Genoa later that year.4 See John Holroyd.
With a Mr Forward, Bolton arrived in Rome from Naples in December 1729; Stosch listed them among the Jacobites in March 1730 and reported their departure in April (SP 85/16, f.613; SP 98/32, ff.44, 57).


Boone arrived in Florence from Rome with Sir Brownlow Sherard on 4 November 1733.1 He returned to England the following year, when he succeeded his father as MP for Ludgershall.

Booth was 'a man of very good sense', according to Stuart Mackenzie, 'a Jesuit, but without any of their absurd prejudices'.1 He had lived at Loreto in 1742-4 and 1746, and from 1758 to 1761 he had been tutor in Italy to the 8th Baron Arundell of Wardour. In 1761/2 he succeeded as Rector of the English College in Rome. Father Thorpe later remembered that Booth was 'remarkable for his many memorandum papers stuck in Breviaries, & other books, laid on shelves, & dropt about his chamber, where a heedless foot too often dislocated these jaunts of his memory',2 and recounted how he had once felled M. Calgagnini, the Pope's Maestro di Camera 'with a great English pudding'.3 Booth was dismissed as Rector following a visit to the College by the Young Pretender in March 1766: it was said that Booth had 'erected a throne for him' and during a Te Deum Mass had acknowledged him king of Great Britain, France and Ireland (Kirk), but Father Thorpe maintained that the Young Pretender had invited himself and Low Mass only had been celebrated. Booth, with the Superiors of three other Colleges visited by the Young Pretender, was expelled and left Rome on 10 April 1766.4
Boothby, a sensitive, well-educated man whose health was never robust, appears to have spent much time on the Continent but only some seven months in Italy. In the autumn of 1775 he crossed the Alps to Turin, and he went on to visit Florence, Rome, Naples and Venice.1 In Rome he witnessed the Possesso of Pius VI on 30 November 1775.2 Amongst Boothby's papers is a note dated Venice 26 March 1775 (but conceivably 1776). On 6 April 1776, returning home, he was in Paris, calling on Jean-Jacques Rousseau, whom he had first met in England in 1766.3 Boothby was in Germany and France in 1777 travelling with Hugh Meynell.4
Boothby was evidently in Florence in 1749; in April 1750 Walpole told Horace Mann 'I have lately seen a Sir William Boothby, who saw you about a year ago [in Florence]'.1  With Colonel Henry St John, he was in attendance on the Duke of York in Italy 1763-4. In Rome Boothby 'was so much out of order that he was unfit to go out of the house';2 he appears in Richard Brompton's group portrait of the Duke of York with his friends.
Boothby Skrymsher was in Rome by 10 February 1760,1 and was recommended to Horace Mann in Florence later that year.2 He appears in Patch's Punch Parties painted in Florence in 1760 (Dunham Massey) and 1761 (Chatsworth and WSL). He left Florence hurriedly on 17 February 1761, with orders 'so pressing to return to England that he did not propose to stop anywhere more than should be necessary to buy passports [i.e. Venice]', leaving the Countess Marianna Acciaioli 'in tears'.3 Louis Dutens later recalled that in Turin Madame de St Gilles, 'near fifty years old' [in January 1765 she was 'past fifty'], had inspired Lord Charles Spencer and 'Mr Boothby' with a passion 'of which I myself was a witness';4 this was probably Boothby Skrymsher on his arrival in Italy, though there is no other record of him in Turin. He was back in London by 10 April 1761.5

Lord Boringdon came to Italy with Lord Morpeth (later 6th Earl of Carlisle) and the Rev. Matthew Marsh, and he later described his tour in his memoirs (Morley MSS). Mary Carter had met them in Berne in the summer of 1793 among 'a flight of Englishmen going to Italy'-'Lord Morpeth (a pretty soft manner); Lord Boringdon (as decisive)'.1 George Canning, Boringdon's close friend from Christ Church days, had conceded that since this was probably his last chance to travel 'at any considerable length for purposes of mere leisure and entertainment' he should go to Italy and accept 'the additional temptations, which the company of Morpeth & of Marsh must offer'. At Turin Boringdon met Lady Maynard who 'had made herself perfectly mistress of all the passes of the alps'. At Genoa he saw the seizure of a French frigate by the Bedford, but was advised to leave under cover to elude any Jacobin reprisals. He sailed with Morpeth and Marsh to Leghorn where Boringdon was impressed with the opera (David and La Vinci). They passed quickly through Lucca and Florence to Rome, where they spent six weeks. Thomas Jenkins recommended Colin Morison as their guide, although Boringdon remarked that 'M's' [Morpeth's] knowledge of Rome was such that 'he might almost himself have acted as cicerone'.  In January 1794 they went on to Naples, taking with them an Italian master. Lord Granville Leveson-Gower, whom they met in Naples and who became their particular friend, shared his services. Morpeth rather charmed Lady Webster ('I always liked him'),2 but she made no mention of Boringdon who was, however, shocked by the corruption of court and state in Naples. In July 1794 Boringdon and Morpeth were listed (clearly retrospectively) among the 'prodigious number of young Lords' who had passed through Rome on their way to (or from) Naples.3 'Lord Boningdon' had left Venice with Lord Granville for England by 22 April 1794.4 His account book (Morley accts.MSS), which shows a total cost for the tour of £1,350 (of which 'about £165 lost at play'), includes payments to Mr Clarke [James Clark] in Naples (£25) and to Guy Head in Rome for pictures (£14). Bronzes by Zoffoli now at Saltram are thought to have been bought by Boringdon in Italy in 1794.5 Boringdon visited Italy a second time in the 19th century, before 1819.

Captain Born was in Rome on 2 February 1738 with his travelling equipment: a tent 'very convenient for summer when one suffered with fleas and Bugs - he carrys it in the cushion of his chaise and can set it up in a trice like a Hammock'; on 11 March Born dined with George Sinclair, Thomas Brand and a Mr Walter (Sinclair jnl. MSS).
Bosanquet was in Padua on 23 October 1738 with William Roundell,1 and they were lodged on the Strada Gregoriana at Easter 1739.2
Richard Bosanquet lived abroad some ten years, from 1779, to escape his creditors.1 His cousin Samuel Bosanquet wrote to him (n.d., probably July 1779), 'I have received two letters from you one of the 2nd of June from Leghorn the other of the 8th from Florence.... You have never given very explicit directions where I should send my letters to you.... My last I judged from your account ought to be sent to Naples, but I now find you did not get it till you came to Florence'.1  It was, presumably, the same Bosanquet who was at Rome on 20 April 1779, intending to return to Naples to pass the summer.2 On 7 August 1779 a Bosanquet had delivered a letter from Turin to Genoa, and John Collet, the British consul, intended introducing him to all the English; on 30 October Collet wrote to William Poyntz at Turin that he was glad to hear Bosanquet had received an addition to his fortune and asking where he now was.3 Richard Bosanquet's mother had died on 18 September 1779, leaving him her house in trust. Further references to Bosanquet in Italy probably all concern Richard. 'Bosanquit' was presented to the court at Turin on 29 October 1780.4 'Mons. Bosangart' arrived in Venice on 4 April 1784;5 Mr Bosanquet 'who has a house in Bruton Street' met Garmston in Naples on 27 November 1787,6 and Bosanquet was dining with Sir William Hamilton at Naples on 3 January 1789.7
An Italian journal of 1731 among the Bosanquet MSS at Dingestow Court may have been his (untraced 1991).
Samuel Bosanquet travelled in Italy with Henry Hunter (whose daughter he married on his return); a journal at Dingestow Court (untraced in 1991) gives 1766-7 as the date of the tour. By 10 January 1767 they had arrived in Florence,1 where Horace Mann gave them an introduction to Cardinal Albani in Rome, acknowledged on 7 March.2 On 8 June they left Venice.3
Boscawen was in Florence, with 'Mentiven'[?] and Barnard [probably Frederick Augusta Barnard], nobili inglesi, on 4 November 1769.1 He was presumably the Boscawen with M. de Crillon at Naples in May 1770 when, during the ceremony of the liquefaction of the blood of St Januarius, 'the blood remaining hard longer than usual the Mob began to take exception at Mr Boscawan and M. de Crillon as thinking them Hereticks ... some women more zealous than the rest threw stones at them'.2


Although his wife Diana was set on visiting Turin,1 Godfrey Bosville sailed in a man-of-war from France to Genoa, and they moved on quickly to Florence. 'A strange husband, Mr Bosville, and his wife who', thought Horace Mann, 'is come to Florence for the same reason that other unfruitful ladies go to Bath'.2 By July Mann was finding Mrs Bosville an outright embarrassment. She had taken as her lover a ship's purser, one Prole, with whom she performed in a church 'and all over the town in the face of everybody by moonlight' (242, 251, 263-4). Yet Mann invited the Bosvilles and Prole 'to trot in his orange groves', and eventually came to pity her, 'for at last it has been discovered that her mate was incapable, besides being the greatest fool in the world' (35:41; 18:275, 286, 309). Bosville was known as 'poor Nykin' behind his back, a sot and a cuckold (18:263-4); 'I know nothing of him but that he has [the] meanest look and is one of the greatest fools I ever saw', wrote Mann (18:242). He was considered to have mishandled his wife's affair, on one occasion encouraging her to leave Florence 'and keep poor Prole company, that he could not go for ten days because he had letters to write' (286). In September Mann wrote that Bosville was said to be preparing to join Monsieur de Traun's army, 'to try to get a reputation'; he had 'set out for England to sue for a divorce, unless he repents by the way'; Diana had persuaded her husband to release her with an allowance, and an article had appeared absolving Bosville from the responsibility for any children Diana might bear; she meanwhile was said to be in Genoa, 'waiting for the return of her seaman' (309). The Bosvilles were later reconciled; the eldest of their four children was born in 1745 and the paternity was not contested.

After retiring from the army in 1777, William Bosville travelled on the Continent. His 1778 passport, signed by Louis XVI and de Vergennes, describes 'le sieur Bosville allant en Italie'.1 A 'Booswil' was listed in Florence on 20 March 1779.2 He went on to Spain and Africa with a Colonel Hawke.3
Boswell had already spent a year studying in Holland and travelling in Germany and Switzerland, before he entered Italy on 6 January 1765. His Italian journals and memoranda have been published,1 revealing his main concerns to have been sex, religion and politics, the first predominant (venereal disease was diagnosed by James Murray, the Pretender's physican, in Rome on 29 April). Though he was a prey to self-doubt, and once called himself 'a libertine and ignoramus', he was also able to tell Jean-Jacques Rousseau (3 October) that 'nine months in this delicious country have done more for me than all the sage lessons which books, or men formed by books, could have taught me'.  He reached Turin in January 1765 and at once described it as containing 'a great many idle men, and a great many abandoned women'.2 On his first brief visit to Rome in February he met John Wilkes and Angelica Kauffman ('quite in love'); Nathaniel Dance took him to St Peter's and he saw 'some fine pieces' in Gavin Hamilton's studio. Boswell quickly followed Wilkes to Naples, where he studied Cochin's Voyage d'Italie [1758] and 'ran after girls without restraint'. He came to consider the Neapolitans 'the most shocking race: eaters of garlic and catchers of vermin'. He was calmer in Rome during Holy Week, feeling devout in St Peter's and being presented to the Pope (13 May), although he sensed 'the gross flattery, the obvious scheming, the discontents, and the universal ambition of ecclesiastical politicians'. The antiquarian Colin Morison (ultimately an 'ill-humoured Scot') conducted him on a six-day tour of the City which so aroused Boswell's classical education that they conversed in Latin. He met Winckelmann and often saw Andrew Lumisden, the Pretender's secretary ('a learned, pretty, honourable man') with whom he went to Frascati to witness the Pretender's younger son, Henry Benedict, the 'majestic and elegant' Cardinal, celebrating Whitsunday Mass. It was with Lumisden that Boswell went to see 'Horace's Farm' near Tivoli and was sufficiently moved to write: 'Divine Horace whose Poetry has charmed my youthfull Soul I am now on the very spot which was your delightfull Retreat'.3  Of contemporary artists, Boswell watched Batoni paint Colonel William Gordon's drapery (18 April), but thought the colouring of Batoni's Simon Magus in S.Maria degli Angeli 'false and unnatural'. On 4 April he commissioned Mary Queen of Scots resigning her Crown from Gavin Hamilton for £200 (Hunterian, Glasgow). He sat to two Scottish painters: on 4 May to George Willison in a 'plain, bold, serious attitude' (SNPG) and on 31 May and 3-4 June to James Alves for a miniature. On 3 July Andrew Lumisden told John Strange that Boswell had left with him a miniature of himself by Alves 'from a large portrait done by Willison', to be sent on to Scotland.4 He also appeared in a group caricature by Patch; on 17 August 1765 Godfrey Bagnall Clarke wrote to him from Milan, 'Patch has by this time encanvass'd you, and I dare say made us as ridiculous as his Genius will admit'5 (the picture probably the caricature group now YCBA).  It was also in Rome he met Lord Mountstuart (later 4th Earl and 1st Marquess of Bute) who, having heard him recite ex tempore Horace's Fons Bandusiae at Tivoli, offered to 'teach him how to live'; Boswell joined him and his tutors-Paul Henri Mallet a Swiss scholar ('more than thirty'), and Colonel James Edmonstone ('more than forty')-to form a lively and querulous company. They travelled to Venice where they stayed with General William Graeme, commander of the Republic's forces. Boswell left Mountstuart at Milan and went on to Mantua and Parma where he stayed with the writer Alexandre Deleyre. In Florence he found Nicolas Dothel, a Lorrainer, to be one of the best teachers of the flute in Europe. He particularly liked Siena enjoying the simplicity, openness and gaiety of the Sienese. He said he was 'the only foreigner there' and that he gave himself up 'entirely to the delerium of love' with one Maria Girolama Piccolomini (with whom he subsequently maintained a correspondence).6 He also alleged he read Ariosto for two hours each morning, wrote in Italian and made music in the afternoon. In October and November he visited Corsica, and talked at length with General Pasquale de Paoli, leader of the Corsican rebels against the Genoese and the French. Boswell's Account of Corsica; the Journal of a Tour to that Island, and Memoirs of Pascal Paoli was published in 1768.
Encumbered by debts on his property which were compounded by the collapse of the South Sea Company in 1720, Boteler 'made [his] retreat into foreign parts, stayed abroad ten years, and returned home in 1732'.1 On 24 August 1726 Francis Colman, the British resident at Florence, asked Boteler for information concerning the Pretender at Bologna.2 On 21 February 1727 'Bount and Butler' [Blount and Boteler] arrived in Rome3 and lodged near the Piazza di Spagna.4 On 19 April they accompanied Willem Bentinck and his tutor from Rome to Naples, where they had arrived by 25 April. Bentinck wrote that the '2 Hertfordshire Gentlemen' had earlier spent nearly six months at Mr Necker's at Geneva where they had become 'particularily acquainted' with his brother Charles Bentinck.5 In November 1729 Boteler was detained in Naples.6 He eventually returned to England through Venice which he left on 15 April 1732, Burges, the British resident, then saying Boteler was his relation.7
Boughton was travelling to improve his health.1 With Sir Bourchier Wrey he visited Lady Pomfret in Florence on 19 August, shortly after their arrival.2 When Lady Mary Wortley Montagu attempted to rent Sir Bourchier's lodgings in Rome in October, she said they had been recommended to her by Boughton.3 On 5 October 1740 Samuel Dashwood wrote that Boughton had left Florence 'about 5 days ago very ill for Pisa, for the Benefit of the Air, where they say is a very good one, I wonder he's alive, He lives upon greens & water, & takes not enough even of those to sustain life, he looks terrible & I fear must dye soon'.4 Boughton was back in Florence by 10 October and appeared at Lady Pomfret's frequently throughout November and December, generally with Samuel Dashwood and Samuel Sturgis.5 Boughton left Italy uncured and died at Lyons.3
Boughton Rouse arrived in Venice on 28 July 1779.1 He left Florence on 20 August 1779 with a letter from Horace Mann for Lord Herbert [later 11th Earl of Pembroke] in Rome.2 In January 1780 John Hippisley listed 'Mr Boughton Rous' and Sullivan in Rome, possibly travelling together,3 and he introduced them to Thomas Jones the same month.4
Georgius Bourcher fil. Gulielmi 61' enrolled at the University of Padua in September 1720/11 and the name of 'George Boscher' appears in the visitors' book there on 1 February 1722.2
Bourchier was in Padua with Christian Cole on 1 September 1704.1 He was in Rome by 25 September when he was first mentioned, again with Cole, by the Duke of Shrewsbury, who also saw Bourchier in Rome in December 1704 and 21 April 1705;2 see also Cole. Bourchier appears to have stayed in Rome at least until December 1705 when Lord Irwin wrote from Rome that 'Mr Boucher ... has tho' but a gentleman, a greater allowance than I'.3 On his return he undertook the building of Beningbrough Hall (1710-16), whose style implies a knowledge of Italian baroque architecture.4
He was in Padua on 2 March1 and on 22 March he had left for England with Owen Swiney.2
In 1776 he travelled through Italy, France and Holland, where his correct knowledge of the languages of each country, added to the politeness of his address, and the pleasures of his conversation, procured him an introduction to the best society, and most valuable repositories of the arts on the Continent' (GM, 81i[1811]:186).

He was possibly the 'Buver' in Venice on 5 June 1762,1 and was certainly in Florence in October 1762, shortly to return home 'as he could not strike up the bargain with a great Lady here'.2 In Rome in July 1764 James Martin noted that Solomon Delane had painted a view of Lake Albano 'for Mr. Bouverie',3 the commission evidently given before he left Rome. Edward Bouverie is often confused John Bouverie.
A remarkable connoisseur, collector and archaeologist, John Bouverie made three visits to Italy. He had already inherited a considerable fortune from his father and older brother when he made his first tour in 1741, at the age of eighteen, with the knowledgeable John Clephane as his governor.1 They were in Genoa in April and in Venice for most of May. On 10 June they arrived in Florence with Joseph Trapp and Samuel Fuller. Horace Mann was their host, but he did not enjoy their presence. They were a 'silent company' and knew 'no language'; Bouverie was paying all the expenses.2 On 17 June they visited Pisa, but returned to stay in Mann's guest house, the Casa Ambrogi, until October.3  Though he may have stayed silent, Bouverie's character was emerging. He was regularly receiving from London copies of Common Sense, the opposition journal,4 and he began to acquire drawings. From Ignazio Hugford he bought an album by Holbein (now BMPL as 'Clouet') and, very probably at that time, a group of drawings by the seventeenth-century Florentine painter Domenico Gabbiani which included copies of old masters; and from the Abbé Bondocci he bought an album by Guercino, an artist Bouverie came to admire greatly. Bouverie and his party went on from Florence to Rome where they stayed from late October to February 1742, and they spent several weeks in Naples in March. They left in mid-March to begin their return journey through Rome, Bologna, Parma and Piacenza, and they were back in London by 28 June (see also John Clephane). Bouverie returned to Italy with Richard Phelps in 1745 (during the War of the Austrian Succession and in the year of the Jacobite rising in Scotland). They were presumably in Rome in March when they obtained passports for Naples through the Pretender's adviser, James Murray.5 On 5 May they left Rome with the young painter James Russel and James Dawkins, travelling through Loreto and Ancona to Bologna, where they spent a week from 12 May. Bouverie came to know Bologna well; although further visits are not recorded, he had twice stayed there on his previous Italian visit. Many of his Guercino drawings were said to have been acquired from Francesco Forni, a dealer in Bologna, and in his will he left an annuity to one Signora Teresa Tacconio of Bologna, daughter of Pietro Baratti 'of the same town'. From Bologna the party went on to pass Ascension in Venice, where Dawkins stayed while Bouverie, Phelps and Russel left on 4 June to return to Florence. Russel observed that these gentlemen 'did not travel merely to amuse, but to improve themselves' and he had benefitted from their 'free, easy and ingenious conversation'.6 On 24 October Bouverie and Phelps were dining with Clephane and Joseph Leeson in Rome.7  Bouverie continued to acquire. He commissioned two views of Rome from Joseph Vernet in October8 and the Roman antiquarian Domenico Bracci later asserted that he had helped Bouverie with the greater part of his collections of prints, drawings, engravings, cameos and medals.9 Bouverie's collecting was probably facilitated by his Jacobite sympathies. On 4 January 1746 Mann wrote that Bouverie 'does not act publicly, as to the Pretender, but has all his people constantly to dine with him'; with his three companions, Rowland Holt, Phelps and John Monro, he had waited on the Pretender to compliment him on his son's birthday and he dined with the Pretender at the New Year.10 In March 1746 Bouverie was suspected of leaving Rome to go to Vienna on a mission for the Pretender.11 He was in London by January 1747, and in May Mann alleged that he had had to give bail for his loyal behaviour on his return.12 Bouverie set out from London for the last time on 28 May 1749 'proposing to be at Rome in about six weeks'; by 12 August he had reached Florence and on 14 November he was in Rome.13 He spent four months there, adding to his collections (he left a statue of Apollo with James Russel14 and ordered six more paintings from Joseph Vernet in January 175015), and preparing for his expedition with James Dawkins and Robert Wood to 'the most remarkable places of antiquity on the coast of the Mediterranean'. Dawkins and Bouverie left Rome on 17 March and with Wood sailed from Naples in May. Before they sailed Bouverie made his will on 4 May, 'mindful of the Accidents which may attend me on the Voyage'. On 19 September Bouverie died at Guzel Hissar in Turkey and he was buried at Smyrna. Wood paid tribute to him in the Ruins of Palmyra [1753], describing Bouverie's collection of 'drawings, medals, intaglio's and cameo's' as proof of 'the correctness of his taste'.
Tommaso Bouwater' arrived in Venice on 24 November 1768.1 'Mr Bowater' left Venice for Florence on 2 September 1769,2 and a Mr Bowater was in Rome that autumn.3

Though destined to achieve notoriety as the expurgator of Shakespeare and Gibbon, Thomas Bowdler first graduated in medicine at Edinburgh University. He then travelled for some three years on the Continent, coming to Italy in the summer of 1778 after visiting Germany, Austria and Hungary. He 'visited every part of Italy and Sicily', his nephew later wrote, to return home 'familiarly acquainted with modern languages, his taste formed after the purest models, and his knowledge enlarged from the various sources of information which had been opened to him'.1 One such source was John Strange, the British resident in Venice, who appears to have stimulated an interest in natural history and geology, and obsequious letters written in Italy from Bowdler to Strange furnish some details of his travels.2 He had travelled out from London to Spa with Rowland Burdon, who then went off on his own to Switzerland and France (1 Jun. 1779). Bowdler was in Padua in July, where, he told Strange, 'my mornings are employed with my Books, & Italian Master; my evenings with some very kind friends to whom you was so good as to introduce me' (28 Jul. 1778). After staying with Strange in Venice he went to Florence, where it rained ceaselessly for six weeks and only Horace Mann's kindness redeemed the circumstances. He went on to find clear skies and English society in Rome, assuring Strange that meanwhile his 'Telescope and Thermometer' were well (7 Nov. 1778). He mentioned meeting the Bishop of Derry who, however, was not impressed with 'That would-be naturalist, and half-natural, poor Bowdler, whose mind and ideas seem to limp more than his body'.3 In January he was sight-seeing in Naples and becoming ashamed of how dissipated he had been (in his own terms) for the last three months (26 Jan. 1779). In March he again met Rowland Burdon, together with John Patteson, John Soane, John Stewart of Allanbank and Henry Greswolde Lewis; together they discussed visiting Sicily, but William Hamilton then deterred them. Bowdler returned to Rome with the intention of going, early in April, to Genoa, Turin and Milan and then Switzerland (27 Mar. 1779). But he changed his mind and made the deferred expedition to Sicily with John Stewart in May (while Lewis, Soane, Patteson and Burdon made a more protracted tour of the island). Bowdler told Strange of an ascent of Etna and described the volcanic islands of Lipari and Stromboli. Returning to Naples he saw an eruption of Vesuvius, 'glorious beyond imagination' (Leghorn, 10 Jun. 1779). He was weatherbound for a week in Leghorn before sailing to Genoa; he had then been to Parma to see his 'favorite Corregio' and had come to Turin via Milan (Turin, 3 Jul. 1779). He left Italy soon after and arrived in Bath on 28 December, having been abroad 'two Years & a half & travelled 8000 miles' (11 Jan. 1780). When he was elected FRS in 1781 John Strange and William Hamilton were among his sponsors. In January 1783 he returned briefly to Italy as a physician, having been asked by Charles Gore to attend his daughter, Lady Cowper, in Florence. Writing from Strasbourg (29 Dec. 1782) he told Strange that 'the offer which was made was handsome, & I accepted it'; he had set out with Emily Gore and her father on 29 November 1782 and was travelling 'without seeing anything by the Road Side or enquiring into anything but the nearest road to Florence'. On 28 December Horace Mann wrote that the party would find Lady Cowper 'quite recovered'.4 They arrived between 4 and 15 January 1783, and left on 5 February, to go by 'Leghorn or Lerici to Genoa or Antibes by water, and not come near Venice'.5 In 1815, after he had travelled further on the Continent, Bowdler reflected that 'the great advantage to be derived by Englishmen from a view of foreign Countries in general, and of France in particular, is to increase their attachment to their native land'.6
Sometime before the winter of 1792-3 Miss Bowdler and her brother had stayed at the Corcelli hotel in Naples.1 She was at Rome in March 1793 and introduced Sir William Forbes to Sir Corbet and Lady Corbet, her near relations.1 She attended a conversazione at the Hare-Naylors in April and was seen with Mariana Starke in April and May; she left Rome on 7 June.2 It is not clear whether she then stayed in Italy, where she next appears in December 1795. On 2 December 1795 Lady Berwick in Venice wrote that the partnership between Miss Bowdler and Lady Herries (then at Padua) was 'dissolved'; Miss Bowdler and a 'Mrs B.' were in Pisa on 13 December, and Lady Herries was in Venice by 23 December.3 Miss Bowdler was staying in Venice with Lady Herries from at least 6 January to 19 March 1796,4 (her name variously written in the Venetian archives as 'Francesca Boudler', 'Franca Budler', etc) and in April Lady Webster met them staying in Padua.5 Miss Bowdler was staying alone in Venice on 3 June and in Padua on 9 June.6 That summer at Verona she suffered from the French soldiery: 'poor Miss Bowdler has had all her things taken from her at Verona & her shifts cut up into neckcloths & thrown out of the window to the soldiers before her face' and '[Mr Wyndham, the British envoy in Tuscany] says ... she has lost everything but her virtue'.7
After spending ten months at Oxford, James Bowdoin spent two years in England before returning to America; he then spent one year at home before again crossing the Atlantic 'and visiting first the Italian states proceeded by the way of Holland to England'.1 He finally returned home in 1776 on hearing of the battle of Lexington.2 It is uncertain whether he then bought any of the old master drawings which he bequeathed to Bowdoin College, Maine.
Bower was admitted to the Society of Jesus in Rome on 9 December 1706. After his novitiate he taught classics at Fano from 1712-14. In 1717 he was summoned to Rome to study divinity and he became reader of philosophy at the College at Arezzo 1721-3. He was next sent to Florence, and from there to Macerata, where he was judge or counsellor at the court of the Inquisition 1723-6.1 The execution for heresy of his friend Count Vicenzo della Torre led him to quit these 'hellish proceedings' and he escaped from Italy to Douai.2 His enemies said he was forced to flee following misdemeanours with a nun.3

Bowes was in Padua on 8 February 1702 with Thomas Herne,1 and they had been in Italy the previous year.2

The William Blakiston Bowes in Padua on 29 March 17171 was probably also the 'Mr Boles' travelling with Andrew Hay and a Mr Foster from Venice to Padua at a date before April 1717; Hay returned to Venice with Foster, and Alexander Cunningham, the British resident in Venice, reported that 'Mr Boles is also on his way home to Engld'.2
For his principal tours, see under his charges. In addition, he was probably the 'Joseph Bowman' at Padua on 4 August 1728,1 and there is a letter Walter Bowman wrote from Bologna on 15 October 1737, when he was apparently travelling without a pupil.2  Bowman was an antiquary of repute and several of his volumes of manuscript notes survive. 'Memoirs for Travels in Italy' [1727], 'Travelling in Italy and France' (a companion volume), and 'Fugitive MSS' [1765] are in the Biblioteca Nazionale, Florence, and the 'Antiquitatum tabulae' 1764, an album of miscellaneous notes c.1720-50, are in the National Library of Scotland. The first contains notes compiled from Félibien, Misson, Addison, Breval, Les délices d'Italie and other sources; the last two contain letters to and from Bowman, emphasising his erudition. The antiquary Firmin Abauzit writes to him from Geneva (17 Jan. 1733) concerning such divers topics as classical inscriptions, Scipione Maffei and the water-systems of Rieti and Terni; the German artist Giorgio Christofano Martini writes from Lucca (17 Nov. 1733) sending him drawings of Pisa.3 On 12 November 1733 from Rome, Bowman acknowledged the receipt of some Latin verses from Samuel Haynes: 'Tho I live a Sort of an old Life among Ruins yet I dare not aspire to answer you in the Language of the Gods. My muse is damnably hoarse by living underground'.4 Among the letters written by Bowman to Arthur Balfour of Fernie2 there are a number from Italy between 1731 and 1737, touching on art and architecture, and laced with complaints concerning the administration of his estate at Logie which (13 Nov. 1734) he intended to sell. On 20 April 1743 from London he wrote 'I thank God my travels abroad are finisht', but he was to travel at least once more, at the age of sixty-five, with Lord Beauchamp. Further letters from Bowman to Lady Harcourt (1730-3) appear in the Harcourt Papers, 3:2-13.
Bowminster was the English consul in Sicily from 1778 to 1795, living at Messina c.1778-80 and Palermo c.1787-95;1 Lee and Thomas Hardwick met him in Naples on 23 May 1778.2


Boyd went abroad with his wife and three sons (of whom John, 1750-1815, had been to Christ Church, Oxford). They were in Rome in November 1775, and were said to be going to Moscow 'without waiting for the Possesso' [the enthronement of the new Pope on 30 November].1 But they were in Naples in January 1776, when Boyd's gout was cured with a bottle of sixty-year-old brandy (and when Sir William Hamilton described Lady Boyd as looking very like Wilkes).2 In March they were in Rome, Patrick Home describing Boyd as 'a large W. Indian proprietor',3 and they arrived in Venice on 31 April (sic).4 Boyd evidently collected antiquities; one of his vases, from Hadrian's Villa, was engraved for Piranesi's Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778].
With Commander Sir Roger Curtis, General Boyd arrived at Leghorn on 19 July 1783 from Gibraltar. Horace Mann entertained them in Florence and on 24 July they went to the baths at Pisa, meeting John Udny. On 26 July Boyd was in Florence, 'per osservare le cose piu rare', being entertained by Lord Cowper (Gazz.Tosc.).
A plate in Piranesi's Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778] was dedicated to 'Signor Cavalier Arthur Boyer amatore delle Belle arti'.

Boyle was one of Samuel Crisp's circle of acquaintances in Rome between January and April 1739; 'there is one Mr Boyle here,' wrote Crisp, 'a near relation of Ld. Orrery, of a very different Character [to the commendable Sir Erasmus Philipps], but quite agreable'.1 While in Rome, apparently in May, Boyle's Italian valet de chambre was 'taken up and conducted into the Prisons of the Inquisition'.2 His portrait was one of a set of Jacobites painted by Domenico Dupra in Rome in 1738-40 (see Sir James Steuart).
After nearly two years of travel on the Continent, Boyle arrived in Venice with his tutor Robert Dodge on 28 October 1791. On 3 November 1791 they left for Rome,1 and by 3 December they were expected 'every day' at Naples.2 In March 1792 they were again in Rome3 and Boyle was seen in Florence in June.4 He was back in London by 4 August. He may also have been the Boyle who had stayed in Venice between 18 March and 21 May 1791 (listed with 'Eordon' [?] and [Francis] Farquharson).5  His father, Lord Shannon, had offered him advice on his travels, objecting to a proposed visit to Spa because 'I should not wish you, if possible, to see an Englishman whilst you are on the Continent', and expressing his conviction of the worth of a grand tour: 'Nature has done enough for you to have made you a most respectable country gentleman had you never stirred from home, but the knowledge of the world and mankind which you are acquiring so fast will be of use to you every hour and in every situation, private or public'.6
He was probably the 'mons.Boglinton' who arrived in Venice on 6 May 1774;1 Boylston, 'nobile Americano', was in Florence on 11 June 1774.2 In June 1775 John Singleton Copley said that Boylston, having returned from Turkey, had passed through Leghorn 'within a few weeks past' and was 'now gone to Paris', worn out 'with continual traviling, having traviled 14000 miles, and that chiefly by land'.3
Lord Boyne travelled with Edward Walpole, the second son of Sir Robert Walpole. They were in Venice for the Carnival in January 1730 and remained 'till ye Opera begins at Piacenza, rather than go to any other town in Italy'.1 They were in Padua on 11 July2 and Bologna on the 18th, intending to go on to Florence, via Leghorn, Pisa and Lucca.3 They were in Rome by 27 July, when Stosch said they meant to stay 'but a few weeks'.4 On 3 August Stosch reported they were 'entirely taken up with seeing the antiquities' and planned to return to England 'next week'; but on 10 August he said they had gone to Naples, and then that they had left Rome on 26 August for Florence.5 (Owen Swiney meanwhile had written that they were leaving Rome together in the first week of August 'to make the best of our way for Florence by Perugia and Cortona'.6) By November 1730 they were in Padua 'having seen all ye great Towns in Italy', and in December they were 'still' in Venice.7 Walpole returned to England in January 1731, but Boyne stayed in northern Italy. He was in Padua in March with Sir James Gray and Joseph Alston 'going either to Spain or Constantinople'.8 On 13 April 'Lord Boyn, Sr James Gray, Mr Alston and Mr Swiny [Swiney] went on board a small Scotch-ship last night, in order to visit the isles of Malta and Minorca, Gibraltar, Cadiz and Lisbon; from which they propose to come back by land, and see all that is worth seeing in Spain in their return to Italy again, where they are under some sort of promise to be by the end of the Autumn'.9 By October 1731 Lord Boyne was back in England. There are two portraits of Boyne from his Italian tour: Nazari's Lord Boyne in his Cabin (which relates to the last expedition to Spain)10 and a pastel by Rosalba Carriera (priv. coll.).
Milordo Braclé' was staying near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1701;1 conceivably the 'Bridgewater (Herauld)?' at Padua on 19 May.2

A gentleman of great learning and [with] a very eminent reputation as a poet' (Venn), Bradstreet had been in France in 1789 and remained abroad several years. He was in Rome on 20 November 1794 when he met the 4th Earl of Bristol.1 A letter dated Rome 15 May 1795 prefaced The Sabine Farm which he published in 1810, with plates from his own drawings. The book was occasioned by an excursion from Rome to Licenza, via Tivoli, the Baths of Augustus and Hadrian's Villa, and sought, inter alia, to confirm the location of Horace's Sabine Farm (see Allan Ramsay). The letter described how he had almost lost his dog 'Turque', whose face the reader 'will know through Mr Tischbein's etching of it'; in the main text he drew a parallel between the events of Republican Rome, the revolution in France, and the enlightened British monarchy. In July 1795 Bradstreet was in Verona, Padua and Venice, travelling from Rome.2
In 1741 he was in Italy buying pictures from the Ottoboni collection for Dr Thomas Newton and for himself; some he kept and others appeared in a sale of 1754.1 P.L. Ghezzi drew his portrait, presumably in Rome, which was engraved by Arthur Pond.2
After training with Leoni and Rauzzini in England, Braham sang in the Italian opera in England for a year before leaving to study in Italy. He travelled with the singer Anna Storace, with whom he lived for several years. In Milan, Braham first quarrelled and then sang with Elizabeth Billington, and remained in the city for two years. He took lessons in composition in Genoa and was befriended by Horatio Nelson in Leghorn. After their appearance in Genoa, Braham and Storace were offered an engagement in Naples, which they declined. In 1799 they came to Venice, where the aged Cimarosa was writing Artemisia especially for Braham, but it was left incomplete on his death. Braham was singing again at Covent Garden in December 1801 (DNB; Grove).


For thirty-five years Brame acted as a banker in Genoa and he acted as British chargé d'affaires for his last two years of residence. He may have been the 'Monsieur Bramer Inglese' who applied for a passport at Capua on 27 March 1761 en route to or from Rome;1 he was certainly 'Mr Brame the banker' whom James Martin saw in Genoa on 8 October 1763.2 In November 1776 Brame referred to his long residence at Genoa when canvassing his application for the consulate.3 The previous consul, James Holford, had appointed Brame as his attorney, but in December 1776 John Collet, described by Brame as 'my dearest friend and Partner,' was appointed consul. Brame continued in Genoa, sometimes acting as chargé d'affaires during the absences of Collet and his successor Francis Drake, and he was officially chargé d'affaires from 4 December 1795 until November 1797, when the mission at Genoa came to an end.4 He was generally described as the British consul at Genoa, or 'my banker, the English consul' and most thought him civil. William Assheton, at Genoa at the end of October 1783, met 'Mr and Miss Brame';5 at least two travellers, James Edward Smith and the 2nd Earl Grandison, were grateful for his introduction to the other long-term English resident at Genoa, Dr William Batt.6 In 1790 the Rev. Thomas Brand described him as 'a very good natur'd fellow but bitter vulgar & a little inclind to Hebraism in his money dealings'.7
In Rome on 11 March 1738 he told a story of travelling with King Theodore [of Corsica] between Bologna and Florence: they had stayed two days together, the King getting very drunk and, before discovering himself, telling Brand that 'it is the misfortune of People very often to travel with great people without knowing them.'1 In April in Turin the Duke of Savoy inquired after Brand; he was in Padua on 5 October with a 'C.B. Carrard'2 and in Paris on 21 April 1739.3 In June 1754 Brand returned to Italy; having lost his wife and being left with two small children 'he travels again to dissipate his grief', wrote Horace Walpole.4 He spent some time in Rome where he may have sat to Batoni5 and he certainly bought paintings for the 2nd Earl of Strafford; on 28 February 1755 he wrote to Strafford about 'an Englishman, one Wilson who is in such repute as to be employed by many of the Italians & I think he is really the best painter of that sort I have seen abroad'-Brand acquired a 'landskip' by him for Strafford [apparently the Ego fui in Arcadia; priv. coll.]-but he otherwise found that 'the Prices of the Pictures are so extravagant, that it is much cheaper to buy them in England. In short since some famous Copies have been ordered from thence the Roman Painters are grown quite distracted & don't know what to ask.... I set out for Florence in a week.'6 Brand visited Naples first, however, setting out from there for Florence on 7 March.7 Horace Mann saw him in Florence later that month, but was unable to amuse him, as Brand had taken a resolution not to go into company, spending 'his whole time in the Gallery and seeing other curiosities.' By the time that Mann wrote this on 12 April, Brand was heading back to England where he had arrived by July.8 He was conceivably the Thomas Brand who was allowed to export from Rome five paintings (copies) on 22 October 1759.9
From a family of dissenters, Brand became a close friend (and ultimately the heir) of Thomas Hollis, the celebrated radical, with whom he toured in Europe and Italy in 1748-9.1 On this tour they visited Milan and Genoa, but not Rome (see Hollis).2 Brand and Hollis returned to the Continent in 1750-3, but separately, maintaining contact by letter and occasional meetings.3 Brand met Hollis in Rome, and went with him to Naples for seven weeks, returning alone on 22 May 1752 to Rome. There his portrait was drawn by Pozzi in 1752 (engraved by Bocquet 1807) and painted by Thomas Jenkins (dated 1753; Christie's, 18 Jun. 1976), whose career both Brand and Hollis were to promote 'against a scottish faction'.4 Late in September Hollis rejoined him in Rome and they travelled to Verona, where they again separated. Brand went on to Venice where he was briefly tutor to the 2nd Earl of Dartmouth and his step-brother, Frederick, Lord North; but Lords, as Hollis then advised him from Genoa, 'from their rank and wealth, seem almost destined to a kind of sauntering insignificant life; but I hope you have fixed these two to the intention of something more manly and more useful'.4 See also Hollis.
A very elegant and expensive Commoner, whose hospitality far exceeded his means,'1 Brand first travelled to Italy with the 3rd Baron Desart. They arrived in Rome in September 1769 with a letter of introduction from Horace Mann in Florence to Cardinal Albani2 and they were in Venice by mid-January 1770.3 While in Rome Desart sat to Batoni and probably Brand as well.4 Following his father's death in August 1770 Brand was back in England by November, when Horace Walpole enquired about a parliamentary seat for him in Cambridgeshire.5 He returned to Italy in 1778-81 with Aubrey Beauclerk and his wife Lady Catherine, and between April 1777 and April 1780 he was recorded as 'out of the kingdom'.6 In June 1778 Lady Mary Coke learned that 'Mr Beauclerke, Lady Catherine, and Mr Brand were gone together abroad' and she commented upon Mr Brand going with them and leaving his wife behind: 'of all his great fortune he has only remaining to spend two thousand pounds a year; one he gives to his wife to maintain herself and the children. The other he chooses to spend abroad with the Beauclerks; it is not a pretty story'.7
Brand's itineraries will be found under his charges, but his forthright reflections on Italy and Italian travel merit separate notice. They are contained in some fifty letters written from Italy to his sister Susan (later Mrs Carr) and her husband, to the Rev. Robert Wharton, and to the 1st Earl of Ailesbury, Lord Bruce's father (Brand Letters MSS; refs. given in brackets). Brand was not constrained by ecclesiastical duties-Sir William Forbes was puzzled as to why he never read prayers during the winter he spent in Naples with Lord Bruce1-and he spent in all nearly ten years in Italy, until tiring of 'the cares of pupilage and the torment of Exile' (D 22 Apr. 1792).  He acted as tutor 'to get wherewithal to support my family' (D 26 Mar. 1784), and he became a hardened tourist, as his descriptions of Italian customs and court life reveal. In Turin 'we go on in the old way playing snug rubbers at Whist at the Spanish Ambassadors & dressing ourselves two or three times a week to shew off our persons to advantage & captivate the hearts & Eyes of the great Circles', while the English consul [John Trevor] '& the French Ambassador cram us from time to time with Wild Boar & Truffles, Aspicks & Pasticietti' (D 18 Feb. 1787). The royal family at Turin were 'a queer set of beings and in my mind enough to disgust any man of sense' (E 13 Oct. 1790); the Archduke and Duchess of Milan were 'the only princely personages I have yet seen who are fit to be spoken to' (E 18 Jun. 1791). He was amused by Genoese society 'prouder of their families than the Princes of other nations' (E 13 Oct. 1790). When Rome was threatened with French invasion, he thought 'the geese might cackle till they died of hoarseness before they could awaken a single spark of valour in defence of the Capitol' (A 25 Oct. 1792). He was cynical, too, about Venice, where he was not keen 'to row through stinking canals in those coffin-like Gondolas in the heat of that unwholesome climate' (C 13 Apr. 1787). He did not enthuse over the baroque architecture of Turin which revealed, he thought, 'a wonderful deficiency of good taste' with its 'angles and broken curves ... always deviating from elegance and simplicity' (D 31 Mar. 1787). By contrast he was greatly interested in the stern doric temples of Sicily, where, he claimed, 'the remains of antiquity are infinitely superior to any in Italy or France' (E 20 Mar. 1792). He experienced the new packet service (using an American privateer) established by the King of Naples between Naples and Palermo, his fellow travellers including a Duke, a Canon from Palermo and a sailor reading Orlando Furioso, while he read Virgil with the Captain (E 29 Mar., and D 3 Apr. 1792). When the other English tourists 'flock to Rome' from Naples (E 20 Mar. 1792), Lord Bruce and Brand, a volume of the 'nonsensical' poems of Theocritus in his pocket, had alone gone to Palermo; Brand reflected that 'if a thousand millionth part of the gunpowder wasted in Sicily in firing petards in honour of Virgins & Martyrs were employd in blasting the rocks they might have made roads thro the whole Island' (E 8 Apr. 1792), and he further reflected what a country 'would this be with a spirit of commerce and industry with well educated people and with a government regulated by Wisdom and Equity. And what a desert it is at present' (D 3 Apr. 1792). Brand's cultural interests were widely spread. He made a special visit to inspect the manuscripts at the Benedictine monastery of La Cava, near Salerno (A 11 Mar. 1794), and his classical learning had led to his election (as Uranide) to the Accademia dell'Arcadia in Rome in 1784, an honour he accepted with some amusement (D 17 Apr. 1784).2 He enjoyed looking at pictures, though his taste was conventional. He was delighted by the pictures in Genoa and 'almost blind with admiring the fine Corregio's at Parma' (E 11 Nov. 1783); he dutifully followed James Byres round Rome 'to be lectur'd on Carlo Maratt & Pietro di Cortona, upon blue harmony & yellow Harmony' (D 26 Mar. 1784), and he admired the 'Guidos & Guercinos' in the Duke's gallery in Modena (C 2 Dec. 1790). He sat to Angelica Kauffman in Rome for a half-length portrait in December 1783,3 and commissioned drawings from John Rouby (after Schidone) and Lusieri, and copies from Raphael by Seydelmann (A 20 Nov. 1792, 15 Jan. 1793). He was clearly more interested in music, on which he frequently commented. Cimarosa's music he found 'very pleasing tho I cannot think there is much originality in it' (D 24 Oct. 1783). Though he considered the Italian theatre 'far behind the rest of Europe in dramatic entertainment' (D 17 Nov. 1783), he regularly attended the opera; in Turin he described performances of operas by Cimarosa and Marcello da Capua in 1783 (D 24 Oct. 1783) and of Tarchi's Il Trionfo di Clelia (D 18 Feb. 1787). He heard a burletta by the Neapolitan Fabrizi in Pisa (C 27 Dec. 1790), and attended the opera in Rivarola, 'the theatre very little better than a barn' (E 13 Oct. 1790). In Rome in 1784 he heard old Galuppi's Mass which had 'all the fire of a young composer with the learning of the last century'; he was then buying music by Cimarosa and Sartis and playing Boccherini (D 17 Apr. 1784). In 1787 he played Boccherini and Haydn with Thomas Jackson in Turin (D 18 Feb.), where his church attendance was conditioned by 'Pugnani & Casachiello & the excellent band under them' (C 13 Apr. 1787).  Brand was always prepared to be amused by English travellers. His observation was keen: 'here & there [in Rome] we meet an English party with De La Lande [Voyage d'un François en Italie, 1769] or Richards [Jerome Richard, Description historique et Critique de l'Italie, 1766] under their arms & a Lady or two with Lady [i.e. Mrs Ann] Miller's charming letters' (D 26 Mar. 1784). He considered the set of English visitors in Rome in the winter of 1790-1 to be 'very absurd riotous drunken fellows' (C 25 Sep. 1790), and he was particularly amused by the public friction between Bishop Brownlow North and Mrs North (A 16 Oct. 1792, 16 Nov. 1793). Many more of Brand's observations are quoted under other travellers' names.
Late in January 1794, Mr Brand, 'terribly infected with the madness' of Jacobinism was daily expected in Naples.1 By 23 February he was in Rome behaving unconventionally; at a concert in the Chigi Palace 'about the Middle of the first Act there was a great Noise, And the Musick was Stopped by some of the Nobility who had Observed a Man Standing in the Room with his hair close Cropped round his Head, and a dirty Frock coat with a Large Undress Collar to it'. This was the Brand who while at Naples 'had in a drunken Frolic had his Hair Cropped. And now in defiance of all Propriety determined to Come to a Roman Concert in a Dirty dress'. He was 'at this time Traveling with Mr Leeson an Irish Gentleman Brother to Lord Miltown; Both thoughtless and Dissipated and both declaring they would go together in future to every Roman Conversatione in the same kind of Dress'. They subsequenty modified their ways 'and allways appeared in a Full dress Coat at the Assemblys tho' they could not wear a Bag to their Cropped Hair'.2 While he was in Rome his father died and he returned home; by 1797 he was being described as 'gentle in his manners, shy and not happy', although his 'character for violence and democracy' persisted.3

Brandling was in Naples by 4 January 1791 when the 2nd Earl of Mornington described him as 'Really a very good sort of young man, with the warmest zeal for our cause [the support of Pitt], and the most engaging abhorrence of his cousin Grey'.1 Sir John Dick had furnished Brandling and Robert Jenkinson with introductions which had been received by Thomas Jenkins by 27 July.2
Bray appears to have been an unsuccessful artist in Rome in the mid-18th century. Father Thorpe recalled in 1774 that 'there were many [drawings by Hussey] in Rome some years ago, which belonged to a man called Bray who for sometime shewed them as his own performance, until it plainly appeared that he never was able to do anything like them.' Thorpe said Bray had died about fifteen years before and the drawings may have been returned to his relation Matthew Duane, from whom Bray had received them.1 Bray 'was a sad wretch, and neither alive nor dead deserved to be remembered by his uncle Mr Duane'.2 After Duane's death in 1785 the seventy-two Hussey drawings he owned were sold (Christie's, 2 May 1787).
Lord Breadalbane had spent some time in Rome when he left on 7 December 1782,1 but he returned the following February with M. de Saussure (possibly the Alpinist, Henri-Bénédict de Saussure). They were frequent visitors of Allan and John Ramsay in Rome showing them purchases they had made of drawings by Ducros. They took leave of the Ramsays on 6 April, the day that James Byres showed Allan Ramsay 'a very pretty drawing he had made of a temple to be erected in Lord Breadalbane's island.'2 Breadalbane commissioned landscapes from Jacob More, which were much admired in his studio on 17 March 1785 by Lord Grey de Wilton (now Glasgow AG);3 on 29 March William Blackett said the two paintings, 'nearly equal to any Claud', cost £200.4 'You ask me about my old pictures,' More wrote from Rome early in 1787; 'I sold them very well the greatest part to the Earl of Breadalbane.'5 Gavin Hamilton wrote from Rome in the 1780s offering Breadalbane further paintings.6

Breton was travelling with John Mills from Turin to Milan, where they spent about ten days, before arriving in Genoa on 24 November 1726. They planned to travel as far as Florence together, and then separate.1 When they passed through Leghorn late in December Brinley Skinner described Breton as a Catholic gentleman who had resided in France for many years.2 In Florence the following spring, Francis Colman called Breton the son of the late Brigadier Breton, and noted he and Mills did not call on two alleged Jacobites.3 Mills left Rome with a Major Geddes in February 1728, and they were in Padua on 27 March.4
Financed by his father, he went to Rome primarily to study architecture. The elder Brettingham was the executive architect at Holkham Hall, Norfolk, for Thomas Coke, 1st Earl of Leicester, who also contributed to the Rome expenses, besides commissioning Brettingham to buy antique sculpture for Holkham.1 His personal account book survives at Holkham, and covers much, but by no means all, of the younger Brettingham's commercial activity. It has been published and indexed, with a summary of his life at Rome (Brettingham 1983).  In April 1748, soon after his arrival in Rome, Brettingham went on foot from Rome to Naples and back, with James Stuart, Nicholas Revett and Gavin Hamilton, but the idea that he and Hamilton should accompany Stuart and Revett to Greece was abandoned. By Easter 1748 Brettingham was living in Rome at the Palazzo Zuccari with the sculptor Simon Vierpyl; during 1749-50 they were joined by Joseph Wilton and Thomas Patch, and in 1753-4 Brettingham was at Grisoni's house on the Strada Felice (in 1753 with the Scottish painter George Chalmers).2 Joshua Reynolds had included Brettingham in his caricature group, Parody on the School of Athens (1751; NGI), the only other artists shown being Vierpyl, Patch and Reynolds himself. Evidently, with an aristocratic patron and adequate funds, Brettingham was respected among the artists and dealers at Rome. He also sought acquaintance with the grand tourists, with a hopeful eye on their future patronage. In a sketchbook preserved at the RIBA, Brettingham made topographical drawings of Rome and the countryside, and architectural studies including churches, houses and public buildings, some in baroque but most in a Palladian style; one drawing has the date 1750. But it would appear that Brettingham's interests were already less in architectural study than in dealing and profit.  He had been recommended, probably by Lord Leicester, to Horace Mann at Florence, and by April 1749 the latter had introduced him by letter to Cardinal Albani. Brettingham's purchases began almost at once, and they were from the Cardinal's circle: antique statues from the dealers Cavaceppi and Amadei, plaster casts from the sculptor P. Bracci and the architect C. Marchionni. Five statues, packed up for dispatch to Holkham, were refused an export licence. Brettingham's account of the affair and his remedy by means of 'presents' to the Secretary of State Cardinal Valenti, survives in two long letters to Mann and his father. He won the lawsuit after two years. Besides thirteen antique statues and twenty-one busts which Brettingham is known to have sent to Holkham, he bought and restored, usually through Bartolomeo and Paolo Cavaceppi, busts and other works to sell for gain. The account book mentions three antique busts he sold to the Earl of Dartmouth for a 232% profit. In 1752 he was employed in obtaining five large copies of paintings by Raphael and others, for Northumberland House, London; the School of Athens, copied by Mengs, survives at the VAM. The commission came through Horace Mann and Cardinal Albani, but Brettingham gave himself airs, and shortly after he offended Mann; James Russel wrote in January 1753 that 'B- the Architect' had 'a design of regaling himself too much at the expence of others'.3  An entry in his account book describes 'four landscapes by R. Wilson which cost only 8 zecchins each',4 and his acquisition of plaster casts and moulds exemplifies his commercial interests. Four of the casts which he bought were resold to Lord Leicester and are in the hall at Holkham. In May 1753 he wrote to his father, proposing to buy a collection of casts and form an Academy of Design in London; the casts would be supplied by Paolo Posi, who was just about to take a great many for the Abbé Farsetti's villa at Venice. What Brettingham actually did was to have moulds made for himself, from which plaster casts could later be taken in England. He sent home moulds of thirty Greek and thirty Roman portrait busts (acquired since 1750), and of twelve statues. In addition, moulds of Duquesnoy's St Susannah, were obtained from Posi in 1755.5 The Account Book gives much information about taking moulds, besides packing crates and dispatching them for England. In addition to sculptures and moulds, he sent home certain paintings, some of which, such as the Polyphemus by Annibale Carracci and a true and a false Claude from Cardinal Albani, were sold to Lord Leicester. He also bought many books on architecture and topography, including most of Piranesi's works up to 1754. On his way home he stayed with Joseph Smith at Venice, and he wrote to him from Vicenza on 8 August, enthusing over Palladio's buildings.6  Back in England, Brettingham assisted his father at Holkham, Kedleston and elsewhere, but his independent architectural career was not notable. Some of his antique busts were evidently sold to the 2nd Earl of Egremont (Charles Wyndham) (Faustina, Athlete, and possibly the Petworth Aphrodite), and he acted as agent in obtaining antique sculpture for Petworth from Gavin Hamilton at Rome. He was not particularly successful in selling plaster casts, their only known destinations being Holkham, Kedleston and the Duke of Richmond's Gallery in Whitehall. This last named was in effect his proposed 'Academy of Design' to benefit art students, but it was directed by Joseph Wilton and not Brettingham. Within ten years, Brettingham's moulds seem to have passed to John Cheere.
Robert Furze had already added his mother's distinguished maiden name to his own patronymic when he entered the RA Schools in 1775, 'supposing that professionally it might be of service to him' (DBA). When John Soane, a fellow student, set off for Italy on 18 March 1778 as Royal Scholar, he agreed to take Brettingham with him to Rome. The industrious attitude of Soane was to contrast sharply with Brettingham's flightiness. During their first autumn abroad, as Soane toiled away on a British Senate House scheme, Brettingham joined the architects Thomas Hardwick and John Henderson for an expedition to Naples to see Mount Vesuvius in eruption.1 No doubt Brettingham's impulsive behaviour prompted his Roman mentor, referred to in a letter to Soane (22 December 1778) as 'Mr [Gavin] Hamilton', to forbid a second trip to Naples around Christmas the same year; in the same letter Brettingham assured Soane that, 'As You desired, I have measured the great granite Basons in the Medici Gardens these are the sketches'2 (these sketches were shown at the RA in 1783). It apears that in December Brettingham, with Hardwick, was called to adjudicate between designs prepared by Soane and Henderson for the Bishop of Derry.3  Brettingham remained based in Rome for four years, although accounts are sparse. In September 1779 he was occupying rooms in the barracks of the Papal Avignon Guards.4 In January 1780, with Nathaniel Marchant and Henry Tresham, he was sending his regards to Lord Herbert5 and an inscription at Hadrian's Villa shows he was in Tivoli sometime that year.6 In November 1781 'Mr Berthingham' had 'just recovered from a serious illness' and in March 1782 Brettingham 'had just ventured from Naples' to Rome.7 On 15 May 1782 James Irvine in Rome described Brettingham as 'a clever young fellow & very well acquainted with the antiquities of Rome' where he had spent 'about four years studying Architecture'; he was then about to send home 'some casts of the most famous ornaments'.8  Brettingham made little use of the potential patrons he met abroad, with the exception of young Henry Bankes of Kingston Lacy, who arrived in Rome during the summer of 1779.9 Soane made drawings for Kingston Lacy at Rome in 1779 which Brettingham may have seen, but other drawings at Kingston Lacy link Brettingham with Bankes's later visit to Rome in June 1782. Whatever the exact circumstances, in 1783 Brettingham received the commission to redesign the interior of Kingston Lacy (though almost all of Brettingham's major changes of 1784-9 disappeared during Charles Barry's even more radical restyling of 1835).
Bretton (or Britton) accompanied Brigadier Charles Churchill and Captain Elliott on a brief tour of Florence, Lucca, Leghorn and Rome in the summer of 1731.1 In August 1731 Churchill and Elliott were leaving Parma for Milan, without Bretton,2 who appears to have remained in Rome for a year, Spence meeting a Mr 'Britton' there sometime in May or June 1732.3 In September 1732 he arrived in Venice en route to England via Germany and Flanders.4
Deprived of his scholarship at Trinity for unbecoming conduct with a married woman, Breval thereafter led an adventurous and independent life as scholar, soldier, author and traveller. His Remarks on Several Parts of Europe [1726, 1738] became a well-used guide in the eighteenth century. In the second edition he stated that he had collected material 'in ten several tours thither', and that he had taken part in the Duke of Richmond's 'Virtuoso-Parties abroad'. Other evidence of his travel in Italy is sparse. He travelled with George Cholmondeley (later 3rd Earl of Cholmondeley), to whom he dedicated the Remarks, in 1721 and with John Crawley in 1725. He may have been in Venice in 1737 (see below) and a story of his carrying off a nun in Milan was being retailed in 1738.1  His Remarks contain the most complete account of Italy to appear in English since Addison and the first to be illustrated (the plates apparently of his own drawing). Breval particularly addressed the fine arts and he was one of the first Englishmen to take an interest in Renaissance painting. He stressed the importance of Medici patronage in Florence, where he visited the church of S.Maria Novella especially to see Cimabue's Rucellai Madonna. He looked at Mantegna in Padua and admired the mosaics in St Mark's in Venice. He observed the country with an artist's eye, commenting, for example, at Selinunte: 'I have seen no Ruin in any Part of my Travels that could furnish an Artist in that Stile (such as Panini may be now, or Viviano [Codazzi] was formerly) with more sublime or Picturesque ideas' (1738 ed., 1:37). Breval was evidently familiar with important Italian collectors, such as Ruffo in Ferrara and Sagredo in Venice. He knew Joseph Smith in Venice and appears to have seen his collection c.1737.2 He also noted archaeological activity, such as the Duke of Parma's excavations on the Palatine in Rome, and he was one of the first writers to advocate that travellers should 'follow the Method of ranging their observations in proper Classes, and consider every Branch of Antiquity separately, as the Aegyptian, the Greek, the Tuscan, and the Roman' (1738 ed., 1:92).

Brickenden had arrived in Rome by 14 October 1728; on 23 December he set out for Naples with Lord Carmichael, Hering, and Abercromby (who were back in Rome on 19 January 1729). 'Mr Brickenden of Oxford' had left Rome to return to England by 3 March (SP 85/16, ff.463, 465, 482, 507; Walton, 14 Oct., 23 Dec. 1728, 3 Mar. 1729).

When Bridgeman died in Venice, the English resident Alexander Cunningham wrote of him that he had 'not been in Engl'd since ye Revolution. He was so far from taking the oaths, yt he would not speak to them yt had taken them, nor would he receive money from his tenants and debitors in Engl'd, leest they had taken them'; in his next letter Cunningham stated that Bridgeman had left a great deal of money in Venice (SP 99/61, f.311; 26 Feb., 19 Mar. 1717).
According to payments made from Hoare's bank, Bridges had reached Turin by February 1757.1 He was in Padua in June, already well acquainted with both the resident, John Murray, and consul, Joseph Smith, at Venice.2 Bridges became one of Guardi's earliest English patrons, one of the Ventian views he acquired being dated 1758.3 The name of Bridges appears amongst those supporting Piranesi's Lettere di giustificazione scritte a Milord Charlemont of 1757 and he had been in Rome some time when John Parker wrote to Lord Charlemont about the affair on 5 April 1758.3 Bridges sat to Batoni for a half-length portrait in 1758 (Clark/Bowron 203; priv. coll.) and to Mengs for a whole-length, standing on the Janiculum (priv. coll.).5 In June 1760 he was 'nursing a dancing girl in an obscure [Tuscan] villa and waiting the hour of her being brought to bed.'6 He appears in Patch's Punch Parties of 1760 (Dunham Massey) and 1761 (Chatsworth). On 4 November 1760 he was 'at Turin & going thro France with a Passport'.7
Bridges was travelling with James Fox. They were based in Rome between 22 December 1725 and May 1726, Stosch describing Fox as a 'jacobite outré mais prudent' and Bridges as his wiser companion.1 On 10 June 1726 they were in Padua.2 By 16 November they had returned to Rome, from Florence, intending to pass the winter there; Stosch then found them 'infinement plus moderez'; they were leaving on 28 April 1727.3
When Charles Townley took lodgings in Venice at Le Bons' house in September 1768, he noted that he was in the apartment 'Mr Bridges lived in ten years'.1 This was presumably the Mr Bridges who, on 28 April 1755, had taken a letter from Rome to Venice for Sir James Gray,2 and whose name thereafter recurs in diplomatic correspondence, mainly in Venice, but also on visits to Naples in March 17603 and Florence in August 1761.4 Bridges left Venice on 12 March 1763, proposing to stay 'some little time at Bologna' before going on to Florence.5 On 13 July 1763 he was in Padua, 'enjoying the last days of a good Opera', and proposing to stay 'some days at Venice and then setting out for Florence from whence he proceeds to France'.6
Ignorant, awkward and unruly' the young 3rd Duke of Bridgewater was accompanied on his grand tour by Robert Wood, the much-travelled antiquarian and archaeologist. Bridgewater was tubercular and somewhat intemperate, and Wood attended him carefully through France in 1754.1 They left Nice in October and spent a short time in Florence, leaving on 8 November 1754, disgusted at finding the city so empty of society.2 They went on to Rome taking lodgings in the Casa Guarnieri where Robert Adam was also staying.3 Adam, in his own words, became 'very thick' with the Duke, 'who had a great opinion of my judgement in matters of taste and has laid out some hundreds by my advice'. The Duke engaged to buy drawings from Clérisseau to the value of £50 and from Pêcheux to the value of more than £60, and began to talk of having a room entirely devoted to pictures by the best masters. He then suffered a relapse, during which he was also attended by Thomas Brand (1717-70), a family acquaintance who happened to be in Rome. By 24 May he was better, although he remained on a diet until July. With Adam he saw the illumination of St Peter's at the end of June and the Girandola firework display at the Castel Sant'Angelo; he had taken windows in the Farnese Palace for the firework displays which concluded both these days, and had invited the English ladies to attend. In the third week of July 1755 the Duke arrived alone in Naples,4 but he had returned to Rome by August, when he was suddenly called home. 'I was constantly with him for some days before he left', wrote Adam, 'receiving commissions and settling on things which he wanted my advice or assistance on. He has left orders for above a thousand pounds with his antiquarian who is to do nothing without my consent and approbation'. Bridgewater also left Adam 'between four and five dozen of exceeding good claret, with the promise to do everything for me he possibly could whenever it lay in his power'.  Commissions in the Duke's name were subsequently received by Joseph Vernet for four pictures in 1756,5 but the Judgement of Paris which Mengs was painting for him in 17576 and Gavin Hamilton's 'large pictures for the Duke of Bridgewater' which occupied him in 1758 (including the Anger of Achilles, completed by 1765),7 are now lost. The Duke's enthusiasm for the fine arts quickly passed. Adam never heard from him again and he is said never to have unpacked his purchases when they arrived back in England. In his final years, however, he returned to buying paintings, and the Bridgewater collection was to become one of the richest in the country.




Briscoe met George Sinclair and a Mr Fellows in Rome in January 1738. On 12 March Sinclair heard how Briscoe, Fellows and Marshal (Rector of the English Jesuit College in Rome) had had to walk through snow to Bologna, 'like to die with cold' (Sinclair jnl.MSS). Briscoe was possibly a Jacobite, like most of Sinclair's associates, and he was conceivably the 'Brisco/Briscow /Briscowe' travelling with Norreys Bertie.

The Bishop Earl of Bristol (as Frederick Hervey became) was not unduly constrained by ecclesiastical duties. Once the enlightened advocate of religious toleration in Ireland, he became an eccentric absentee, the extent of his continental travels being commemorated to this day by the number of Bristol hotels spread across Europe. 'Lively, odd and half mad',1 he became a capricious patron of the fine arts,2 an indiscreet and witty conversationalist, and an eager student of geology, vulcanology and antiquity. He spent some eighteen years in Italy in the course of five separate visits, each apparently more urgent and listless than the last.  He first visited Italy with his wife in 1765-6. On their way across Europe their eldest son (aged nine) died at Spa; Boswell saw them in Genoa in December 17653 en route for Naples where the envoy, William Hamilton, had long been a close friend. Hervey (as he then was) witnessed an eruption of Vesuvius in March, his curiosity leading to injury from a hot stone.4 On their return north Horace Mann in Florence found them both 'very amiable'.5 Hervey was called home by his appointment as chaplain to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (his elder brother) in 1766. On his second trip in 1770-2, when he was Bishop of Derry, he travelled with his son, John, to pursue geological interests (stimulated both by Vesuvius and the Giants' Causeway in his diocese). Michael Shanahan, a factotum, and an Italian, Bitio, made drawings for him, and he met John Strange (later the British resident in Venice) with whom he was to correspond for many years. Arriving in Rome early in 1771 he discussed with the Papal authorities whether Irish Catholic clergy might not be allowed to subscribe to the oath of allegiance to George III, but no progress was made. By May 1771 he was in Trieste, and in July, with the Abbé Fortis, at Spalato examining the ruins of Diocletian's Palace. His son, meanwhile, was in Venice in the care of Strange. The Bishop spent most of the following winter in Padua in indifferent health and returned home the following year.  It was in the course of his third visit to Italy in 1777-9 that his patronage of artists began in earnest. He was travelling with his wife and his youngest daughter, Louisa (1767-1821; m. 1795 Robert Jenkinson, later 2nd E. of Liverpool). They arrived in Italy in September travelling via Verona to Valdagno, where Mrs Hervey took the waters for twenty days and Hervey roamed in the mountains, again accompanied by Bitio who made 'two or three fine drawings'. They progressed via Vicenza, Padua and Bologna to Florence, where Hervey met the poet Alfieri and paid a brief visit to Siena. By mid-November they were in Rome where Hervey entered the circle of the genial Cardinal de Bernis, the French ambassador; 'every Wednesday', he told his older daughter, Lady Erne, 'I dine with my Cardinal', and he described how the English were 'well receiv'd everywhere'. 'Here is an incredible variety of admirable artists of every kind', he continued; 'I cannot resist the temptation of being extravagant here especially when it is with a view of beautifying dear Ireland'.6 The Pope allowed him 'to take a model' from the Apollo Belvedere ('few heretics are on as good a footing with him' the Bishop boasted to his daughter). He then acquired, through Henry Tresham, a set of antique frescoes newly excavated in the grounds of the Villa Negroni ('I have bought three complete rooms with which to adorn Downhill and le rendre un morceau unique').7 Tresham was one of several artists who initially benefited from the Bishop's presence; Batoni had painted him by February 1778 (priv. coll.; Clark/Bowron 402), 'a striking & pleasing likeness', thought Mrs Hervey.8 In the spring of 1778 he bought a large view of Lake Albano from Thomas Jones,9 and he commissioned three chimneypieces.10 Banks was asked to execute a marble Venus and Cupid, a relief and two busts, but in November the Venus and Cupid was rejected as 'Improper for a Bishop' and the others returned without explanation.11 These whimsical and inconsistent aspects of the Bishop's patronage caused much ill feeling. It did not worry him; 'Tis incredible how pleasantly I pass my time here', he told his younger daughter Elizabeth Foster; while Mrs Hervey was loath to visit palaces or antiquities because of the fatigue and the damp, 'I am impenetrable to both', he wrote, 'and have besides painters working in my room all day. 'Tis really a life of Paradise'.12 His spirits were affected only by the threat of a French invasion of Ireland; 'considering what a number of Irish friars of every denomination abounds here, and how attached our cruel and political laws render them to the Stuart family, nothing could exceed the attention shown by the French ministers here to these gentlemen'.13 Patronage and politics might easily combine however: 'the committee at Rome which governs the religious affairs of Ireland is composed of seven Cardinals ... as venal as a Board of Aldermen, but in order to bribe them you must buy a picture off one, give a poplin to the niece or mistress of another'.14 In May 1778 they took a house at Castel Gandolfo ('a delightful habitation ... wood, water, hills, plains, rivers, and the sea'), where his daughter Louisa had her music master and where two 'well behav'd young men' played the violin. In July an epidemic of malaria severely affected their happiness; his daughter came near to death and the Bishop was not recovered until September. He returned to Rome where in November his wife and daughter found him 'surrounded with busts and pictures and almost as fresh and as well looking as ever'.15 He commissioned designs for a new dining room at Downhill from both John Henderson and John Soane, who was dazzled by 'the magnificent promises and splendid delusions of the Bishop of Derry'; Soane's designs were not, however, adopted.16 In December 1778 the Bishop went to Naples with Soane; Mrs Hervey had procured 'a most delightful apartment almost in the centre of this bay', enjoying 'fine view, good air, and cheerful scenery'. Louisa was still indisposed and was attended by Dr Drummond, but her parents saw much of William Hamilton, whose growing collection and music making were particularly enjoyed. Hervey bought further Italian views from Thomas Jones in Naples.17 They left in March 1779 and returned slowly home, passing through Rome at Easter. Hervey distinguished himself by attending the Maundy Thursday celebration in the Sistine Chapel in full canonicals; 'he was laughed at by everyone ... and Scarcely a nobleman would visit him' said Sir Edward Newenham.18 Two large landscapes by Philipp Hackert dated 1779 and 1780 (Ickworth) were doubtless commissioned on this Italian visit; Tischbein painted Mrs Hervey in Rome in 1778 (Kassel), Anton Maron in 1779 (Sotheby's, New York, 30 May 1991) and Bitio painted her with her daughter (Knight, Frank and Rutley, 10 Dec. 1919). The little Louisa, her mother had written in February 1778, was 'the admiration of every creature - painters sculptors engravers all fly at her'.19  The news of the Bishop's succession as 4th Earl of Bristol in 1779 reached Rome in January 1780. The Earl of Bristol, wrote Father Thorpe, 'has tried to repair his credit among the Artists in Rome by giving & confirming many commissions which at his last departure he had left in a manner not suitable to his rank & fortune'.20 The artists in Rome duly celebrated.21 Jacob More received a commission to paint The Four Elements which he was working on in February 1781, and James Durno and Tresham were each asked for two classical history pieces, all of which were near completion in 1781.22 Lord Bristol's fourth trip, with his younger son Frederick, his daughter Lady Erne and her daughter Caroline, took place in 1785-6. They had spent four days in Florence before 7 January 1786 and arrived in Rome on 8 February. Lord Bristol was then said to have been ill in Naples, although such a visit is not consistent with the fact that his elder son, John, Baron Hervey, then deep in debt in Naples, was unable ever to see his father. In Rome Bristol was occupied more than ever with patronage. Jacob More was now his agent, and his correspondence shows that Bristol had commissioned two statues from Falcioni, a bust of Hadrian from Raggi, and a cast of the Farnese Hercules from Carlo Albacini, as well as copies from Thomas Pye and James Nevay and ten large pictures from More himself. After Rome, Lord Bristol spent the summer 'hovering about Tuscany' and he had returned to Ireland by February 1787.  His fifth Italian visit took place as his house Ballyscullion was nearing completion. He spent much time in France and Germany (and even considered a journey to Spain) before arriving in Rome in December 1789. There he met and sat to Madame Vigée Lebrun who had just arrived from France (the portrait now untraced), and he also commissioned a replica (Ickworth) of the self-portrait she had painted for the Grand Duke of Tuscany. Early in 1790 they met again in Naples; he again sat to her (Ickworth) and she observed that 'il passait sa vie sur la Vésuve, car il y montait tous les jours'.23 Having returned to Rome in March 1790 he sat to Angelica Kauffman in June (pensive by a bust of Maecenas; whereabouts unknown), and twice to H.D. Hamilton (seated on the Janiculum; Ickworth, and with his granddaughter Caroline standing in Jacob More's English Landscape garden in the Villa Borghese; NGI), but his greatest commission had been given to John Flaxman in March for the marble Fury of Athamas (Ickworth), 'the size of the Laocoon', for £600. 'Lord Bristol has reanimated the fainting body of Art in Rome', Flaxman told William Hamilton; 'for his generosity to me I must be silent, for I have not words to express its value'.24 In the event Flaxman's costs far exceeded the fee. Bristol was also anxious to have a great piece from Canova (who had advised him on the Flaxman commission), such as a Venus without the faults of the Venus de Medici which, he considered, was 'détestable, l'attitude d'une Coquette ou d'une Putain', but nothing transpired.25 John Deare received commissions 'to the amount of 270l. from the Earl of Bristol, who had given a great many commissions besides to different artists here; and just as we all expected orders on his banker his Lordship suddenly (as usual) left Rome without giving any orders'.26 In April 1791 Deare was finishing a Venus and Cupid 'which he supposes will remain on his hands according to the usual equitable and gentleman-like manner in which his Lordship thinks proper to treat so many artists'. Hugh Robinson's commissions 'ended in smoke'.27 Bristol commissioned from the French painter Fabre a Milon of Crotona, completed in January 1791. By November 1790, however, Lord Bristol had returned to Ireland. Lord Bristol's sixth and last visit to Italy lasted ten years and ended only with his death. It was made against the background of the French wars. He was travelling with his chaplain, the Rev. Trefusis Lovell, and it was over a year before they reached Italy. In Florence he rented a house for five years and promptly added a new storey; in Siena he indulged his acquired taste for primitives (pre-Raphael painters) and witnessed a fall of meteorites which led to an extensive correspondence with William Hamilton and consultations with Father Ambrogio Soldani. And it was also in Siena that he was alleged to have thrown a tureen of pasta from an upstairs window of his hotel on to a passing procession of the Host; 'it would appear', wrote the narrator, 'that his lordship had a particular aversion to the tinkling of bells.'28 He went to Rome in November 1794 and commissioned Charles Tatham to make designs for a new villa at Ickworth. Within six months, however, Tatham had renounced the engagement, considering Lord Bristol 'too capricious ... the strange life he leads makes it highly probable he may not return to England, being in a constant state of inebriation'.29 By 1796 the design of Ickworth appeared to have been entrusted to Francis Sandys, a young Irish architect who had previously been to Rome, the brother of Lord Bristol's chaplain, but the eventual design was by the Italian architect Mario Asprucci, with whom Tatham was studying.30  In February 1795 William Theed reported that the only commissions given to artists that year had been from Lord Bristol, 'and those only to such as could incircle him; they were the Pyes, Durnos, Hamiltons, Navys [Nevays], Hewetsons, Italians, &c., &c.'.31 Hewetson, 'for the love of bread and cheese' accepted a commission to carve a colossal portrait of Pitt in marble (which was not completed).32 Sposini, an Italian sculptor, was asked to carve a Hercules and the Hydra, Hercules with Pitt's head and the Hydra with those of Fox, North and Burke (Spencer House);33 the English artists 'to a man refused to execute this puerile conceit', explained Lady Webster.34 The German painter Michael Wutky painted four large Italian views for him;35 Vincenzo Camuccini a large cartoon of The Death of Caesar,36 the French painters Simon Denis and N.-D. Boguet sold him landscapes, and another was commissioned from 'Mr Reynagle'.37 Pye meanwhile, on the death of Jacob More in 1793, had become Bristol's agent in Rome.38 Lord Bristol left Rome for Naples where he became, not surprisingly, an admirer of Emma Hamilton. In July he was in Munich, the unrequited lover of Wilhemina Encke ('Madame Ritz') whom he followed back to Italy, reaching Bologna in November and Naples in December. The inamorato wore her miniature round his neck, further enlivening his habitual dress with a white hat edged with purple, a crimson coat, black sash and purple stockings. In January his eldest son John, Baron Hervey, died at sea and his father's sorrow gave way to a serious illness; 'he has been nearly dying', wrote Morritt, 'and I am sorry to say is better and likely to recover'.39 He was back in Rome in May, contriving the marriage of Wilhemina's illegitimate daughter to his eldest surviving son, Frederick, whose opposition was ultimately decisive.  Bristol's travels now became almost reckless; between December 1796 and April 1798 he crossed the Alps three times on horseback; he even considered going to Egypt with Alexander von Humboldt, but Napoleon's campaign finally prevented it. He was in Venice, now under Austrian rule, early in 1798 writing emotional letters to William Hamilton concerning despotism and the transport of a large part of his collection from Leghorn to Naples, 'pictures, busts, some Carrara statues & other marbles ... the pictures are chiefly of Cimabue, Giotto, Guido da Sienna, Marco da Sienna, and all that old pedantry of painting which served to show the progress of art at its resurrection'40 (a number of Bristol's primitives were to be sold at Christie's in 1802 [10 Apr.]). Meanwhile the French impounded that part of his collection which was in Rome; 'that immense, valuable and beautiful property of large mosaick pavement, sumptuous chimney pieces for my new house, and pictures, statues, busts and marbles without end, first-rate Titians and Raphaels, dear Guidos, and three old Carraccis'.41 Artists in Rome petitioned the French for the recovery of the collection to which they had contributed so much,42 but in vain. The collection was eventually sold at Rome, the sale catalogue (dated 1804) comprising 534 lots with a further 32 unfinished commissioned works.43  In April 1798 Bristol set out from Venice for Naples, via Rome, but when he was indisposed near Ferrara the French arrested him and confined him in Milan. 'We all know', William Hamilton confided to Charles Grenville in May, 'that his Lordship's freedom in conversation, particularly after dinner, is such as to make him liable to accidents of this nature'.44 He was eventually released in February 1799 and returned to Venice, still writing indiscreetly to the Hamiltons about 'those execrable highwaymen the French'. He arrived in Naples late in 1799; the Hamiltons had left and the royalists were celebrating their victory over the republicans. Bristol's Neapolitan collection was lost, it is presumed among those cases which Robert Fagan later admitted were destroyed by salt water in a leaky ship.45 In November 1802 he sent to England a group of paintings by Friedrich Rehberg, Camuccini and others.46  In December 1800 his wife, from whom he had been estranged for some twenty years, died at Ickworth, but his reaction appears to have been confined to dissatisfaction with her will. Between 1800 and 1802 Bristol spent his time between Rome and Naples. Between 1800 and 1803 he was listed each Easter as living in the Strada Felice in Rome, at the same address as the painter and dealer Alexander Day,47 but his high opinion of the medicinal powers of the 'acidulous waters' of Naples was to be disappointed. He died on 8 July 1803, between Albano and Rome, in the out-house of a peasant cottage (superstition preventing the owners from receiving a heretic Bishop within their house). He had been riding to the end; in April he was seen in Rome dressed in a purple velvet night cap with a golden tassle and a sort of mitre in front, silk stockings and slippers and a short round petticoat fringed with gold about his knees, a loose dressing gown of silk round his shoulders; 'in this Merry Andrew trim he rode on horse-back to the never-ending amusement of all Beholders'.48 The obsequies of this extraordinary and unsatisfactory prelate were attended, it was said, by eight hundred artists of every nationality;49 his body was brought back to England in a box identified, for security purposes, as an antique statue.50


Bristow travelled in Italy with John Delmé. They were in Rome on 23 January 1734 when they called, without success, on Richard Pococke; on 1 April they were on their way to Venice1 with Robert Dingley, and on 13 April they were in Padua.2 By 30 April they had left Venice and were said to be on their way home,3 but they were in Turin in June when Richard Pococke met them.4
Variously described by Horace Walpole as an oaf, a 'great pretender to taste', and 'that silly mock virtuoso Billy Bristow',1 he travelled in Italy with the unidentified 'Président' and his wife (and father?), and described his journey in a series of letters signed W.B., written in bad French to the Countess of Denbigh.2 He was not a particularly diligent traveller; he failed to learn much Italian and was easily bored, finding Venice, for example, 'charmante pour le coup d'oeil et pour la curiosité; à l'égard du reste je crois qu'on s'ennuyeroit fort'. They arrived at Leghorn and went, via Lucca, in October 1736 to Florence. There he stayed with a Frenchman, 'et d'abord que je sorts, je rencontre l'Angleterre'. They spent nearly three months in Florence, le Président working 'comme un chien enragé' in the Grand Duke's library on a collection of 'poétes provençaux'. Bristow commented that it was strange how the Florentines were so intolerant of each other, yet so indulgent towards the English. They left late in December and passed through Siena on their way to Rome. Again le Président worked ceaselessly in the Vatican, while 'sa pauvre femme reste toujours avec son père'. Bristow was in Naples for the second time in June; the first time had been to satisfy his curiosity, the second for his health. There he met Allan Ramsay who wrote on 2 August (perhaps retrospectively) that 'Mr Bristow brings along with him his own portrait and two others of my drawing'.3 On 25 August Bristow was in Bologna and in September in Venice, describing the furore caused by the Young Pretender's visit earlier that year (28 May-10 June). Bristow had been trying to obtain the post of British resident in Venice, vacant since the death of Elizeus Burges in November 1736, but without success. He had intended to spend two months in Venice, but his affairs compelled him to return home before Christmas.




On 15 September 1724 Brodrick was in Padua.1 From Venice that month he wrote expressing his disillusionment with the Venetian senate, but the published extracts from his correspondence2 provide only a fragmentary account of his subsequent travels in Italy. On 8 November he was writing an earnest letter evaluating the Bolognese school of painters. He went on to Rome where he stayed until 1 March 1725, when he left with Sir Gerard Aylmer for Naples.3 In the summer he returned to northern Italy; he was in Parma on 1 June complaining of the scarcity of pictures to buy, owing to 'the prodigious demand there has been for them in recent years', and in July and August he was back in Venice, where he sat to Rosalba Carriera (priv. coll.), from whom he also bought a copy of her portrait of the contralto, Faustina Bordoni.4 In the spring of 1725 he had bought in Rome two paintings for his uncle, a Rebecca at the Well by Luti and a Tincture of Coral by Poussin, a picture he discussed at some length without showing himself to be particularly perceptive, but he did explain that he had 'waited till the strangers had pretty well left Rome before I dealt for it' in order to keep the price down.
Admiral Brodrick goes ten times a day up to Mr Dick's tower in hopes of seeing them [French men of war] brought in.... Reciprocal invitations have passed between Admiral Brodrick and me, et voila tout', wrote Horace Mann in September 1758.1 Admiral 'Brodech' was received in Lucca in 1758.2
Broderigh' and 'Forcherr' were in Florence on 26 February 1774,1 and 'Cavalier Briderck' arrived in Venice on 14 March.2 He was in Paris in September 1775, and '2 Mr. Brodricks' accompanied Horace Walpole from Calais to Rochester on 15 October.3
Lord Brome received permission to attend a military academy abroad on 1 July 1757, but he had spent some time travelling on the Continent with his Prussian governor, Capt. H. G. de Roguin, before he entered the academy at Turin on 20 January 1758. Within a few days he had been introduced to the Royal family, wrote Roguin, who also described in some detail the regimen at the academy. Since students had to pay in advance for six months tuition, Brome probably stayed until the summer when with de Roguin he visited several German courts before arriving at Geneva. There he decided to join the British troops going to Germany, and by September he had become aide-de-camp to the Marquess of Granby (C. Ross, Corr.of Charles, 1st M. Cornwallis, 4-6).

Bromfield was in Padua on 5 February 17591 and graduated MD at Padua University. He was a member of the Academies of Botany at Cortona and Florence by 1761.2 His 'rare learning in every branch of literature and science', and his studies under the illustrious Florentine professor, Antonio Cocchi, were described in the dedication of his father's Observations on Lithotomy (Florence, 1761).
Travelling in Italy in 1722-3, Bromley's itinerary partly coincided with that of Richard Rawlinson. They met in Florence on 1 September 1722 and in Siena on 12 and 14 October.1 Bromley arrived in Rome early in December; on 5 January 1723 Stosch said he had 'been here 6 weeks and is very intimate with the Pretender and his adherants'; he had also been to Civitavecchia to see a Mr O'Connor with a Mr Hay and Captain John O'Brien.2 He met Rawlinson again in Rome in February and March and on 5 April they dined together with Captain Legh at Prima Porta on the Via Flaminia.3 Later (in 1741) James Edgar, the Pretender's secretary, said he had known Bromley well in Rome: 'he was a mighty honest gentleman, but not of a turn of keeping a secret'.4
Bromley travelled in the care of Charles Parker, an accomplished classicist, who found him difficult. 'He is filled with high notions of his own Consequence', wrote Parker, and must learn 'to behave himself properly'. Although Parker had devised a careful itinerary he did not 'wish him to conform to it farther than was pleasant to Himself. He told me that he did not find that Pleasure in travelling which he expected, & that he wish'd the time was over'.1 Parker was particularly upset when Bromley declined invitations from Lord Cowper and Horace Mann in Florence. Bromley and Parker were together in Rome in February 1783, parted company in Sicily in May, and were reunited in Rome on 27 June, when young John Ramsay called on them; a few months later they appear to have separated for good, Bromley going off to Florence with James Dawkins.2 On 13 December 1783 Bromley and Dawkins were dining at Robert Merry's with John Parkinson and others, before going on to Horace Mann's; six months later Parkinson met Bromley and Dawkins in Milan with Mrs Hannah Long.3 On 10 July 1784 Parker wrote from Vienna: 'My quondam Socius I hear is gone straight to England from Milan. I suppose his Guardians have called him back. Mr Dawkins a friend of his, is come here, he says he has fits of low spirits, that are very frightfull. I feel heartily sorry for him'.4

Brompton was said to have painted a portrait of the architect Robert Mylne in Rome in 1757,1 but Hayward did not list him there until 1758,2 when he was living in Mengs's house in the Strada Vittoria, presumably as his pupil, with James Nevay and Colin Morison.3 Nevay and Brompton were still with Mengs in 1759, in which year Brompton helped to administer the estate of Jonathan Skelton who had died in Rome on 19 January.4  In September 1761 arrangements were being made for Brompton to copy from a scaffold Raphael's Galatea in the Farnese Palace, and Horace Mann was then acting in Brompton's interests:5 'I hope he will at All times remember what infinite obligations he is under to you', Lord Northampton told Mann the following year.6 Northampton, who was appointed ambassador extraordinary to Venice 1762-3, persuaded Brompton to join him: 'I am very glad to hear him so well spoken off by all people coming from Rome', he told Mann, 'his Paintings are very much admired in London, & I really think his is a very promising genius'.6  Brompton arrived in Venice on 8 January.7 By December the British resident, John Murray, was telling Mann 'I think you now give Brompton very good advice by endeavouring to persuade him to go directly for England - he certainly has made a sufficient Progress in his Business for anything, that he will have to do at Home and he wants a Spur to Business'.8 But Brompton was still in Venice when the Duke of York and his retinue arrived at the end of May 1764 for the Feast of the Ascension. Probably through Murray, Brompton was commissioned to paint a group portrait of the Duke and his party. They were at Padua where, Brompton later recalled, he had been busy 'owing to Mr Murray's desire, that I might not loose the opportunity of painting the D: of York ... but it was not possible to foresee that what Mr Murray intended to be of the utmost servis to me, shou'd be of so very contrary an Effect'. By 1 August 1764, from Venice, Brompton was telling David Garrick of the difficulties he was already experiencing over payment for the original and copies; Garrick lent him £80 over the ensuing year, but Brompton drew the allowance prematurely and behaved most ungratefully.9 On 31 July 1764 John Morgan saw him in Venice with Lord Ossory and observed that he was 'very intimate at ye Resid'ts'; on 12 August Ossory and Brompton were in Parma,10 and on the 19th in Bologna; Brompton alone was back in Rome on 21 September.11 On 9 October he told Garrick his copy of Lord Ossory's portrait was finished, 'but at present I am imploi'd upon the Copys of the Duke of Yorks picture, when I have finnish'd, three of them I shall probably come to England to doo the others'.12 He was probably the 'Gio. Branbuon Inglese Pittore' living on the Via Babuino at Easter 1765, and he was still in Rome in June 1765 when Cardinal Albani found the Duke of York's picture 'très joli et très gracieux'.13 Hayward noted in 1765 'Mr Brompton and [Nathaniel] Dance leave Rome',14 but Brompton was elected accademico di merito at the Accademia di S. Luca on 17 November 1765, and apparently received his diploma in person on 5 January 1766.15 Brompton talked of returning to Italy in 1768, but no evidence survives of a second visit.16 He exhibited the Duke of York's picture at the SA in 1767; the original is now at Windsor and there are other versions, at Hampton Court and in private collections. In 1775 Father Thorpe wrote that Brompton was well remembered in Rome, but that his 'ambition to live like a gentleman has hurt his mind'.17

Lord Brooke had set out from England soon after leaving Winchester in 1734,1 but he did not reach Florence until 22 February 1739.2 He was in Rome by 18 April (when Samuel Crisp met him and called him 'a very pretty lad').3 By June he had found Rome somewhat disappointing; although St Peter's was admirable, the modern palaces 'are built to be peopled only with statues and pictures; whilst the families retire into a corner of an upper story, and eat almost as little as the breathless inhabitants that fill their galleries. The floors are of coarse bricks and, with the gardens of their villas, are kept so dirty', wrote Brooke, that the whole effect was like seeing a 'person dressed in a tawdry rich coat, with a dirty shirt'.4 But Lady Hertford later recounted that Lord Brooke had been 'so ill all the time he was in Italy, that he took little delight in anything he saw there, nor could he see half of what he intended'; she also mentioned that he owned some views of Venice by Canaletto, which he had bought on his travels.5 Later, when Canaletto was in England, Brooke was to commission five paintings and three drawings of Warwick Castle. Horace Walpole recorded Lord Brooke at Geneva in October 1739,6 and he was back in England by May 1740.7
Brooke went on a tour of France and Italy with Dr John Parkinson, whose prolix journal furnishes a detailed account of their itinerary (Parkinson jnl.MSS). Brooke did not survive his journey, dying of a fever in Milan in July 1783, eight months after they had entered Italy. They were in Italy at the same time as the Berry family and Brooke's old college friend, Sir James Graham and his tutor Thomas Brand (c.1751-1814), all of whom they met frequently in Naples, Rome, Florence and Milan. In Florence they attended a reception given by Horace Mann and Lord Cowper in honour of the King of Sweden. In Rome they called on Thomas Jenkins, who induced Lady Elizabeth Foster to introduce them to Cardinal de Bernis, and they were entertained at the Barberini Palace. In Naples they were shown antiquities by James Clark and entertained by Lord Tylney. On their return to Rome they studied the palaces and antiquities under the direction of James Byres, whose arduous course was spread over five weeks from 4 March to 7 April. On 17 March, for example, Parkinson described how, with a large party of English people, they visited Cardinal Zelada whose house was 'fill'd from one end to another with curiosities but ... there seemed to be a great deal of trash', and then went on to the Temple of Minerva, Mars the Avenger, the Arcade beneath the Quirinal and Trajan's pillar; and on 23 March they visited the churches of S.Atanasio, S.Maria sopra Minerva, the Gesu, S.Maria in Aquiro, S. Bartolommeo all' Isola, S.Cecilia, S.Francesco a Ripa, S.Calisto and the Farnese Palace. Parkinson visited Batoni in February or March 1784 but found his painting rooms 'stank so abominably that it was impossible to remain in it for any time'. In June 1784 Brooke was at the Auberge Imperiale in Milan,1 already mortally ill, and Parkinson's journal ends with Brooke's death on 19 July.  Brooke had bought and commissioned a number of works of art in Italy. In Naples two views by Pietro Fabris, in Rome a mosaic picture which cost £50, a chimneypiece and two tables of alabaster, and in Venice on 28 May 1784 he 'sat to Mr [H.D.] Hamilton for his Picture', which has been identified as the portrait sold in 1994 (though this could also be Graham, see below). Brooke had previously been encouraged by Philip Metcalfe to look at the work of English artists who 'take the lead in Rome', particularly Jacob More and James Durno.2 In 1785 More wrote that he had had a commission 'to paint two Picturs ... for one Mr Brook a Young Gentleman who lately died. I have received a letter from his relations Countermanding the Order'.3 Brooke's purchases were sent back to England from Leghorn after his death; the shipping agent telling Brooke's sister, Elizabeth, apropos of the Borghese Graces (who originally supported an alabaster urn) that 'no man's urn deserves better to be supported by the Graces than his'.4 Several of Brooke's acquisitions appeared in the Mere Hall sale in 1994 (Christie's, 23 May): two landscapes by Jacob More, a copy of the Venus de Medici by Innocenzo Spinazzi (dated 1784), a copy of the Borghese Graces in white marble, a pair of marble Campana urns, a set of six Neapolitan views by della Gatta, and H.D. Hamilton's portrait of his friend Sir James Graham, showing him leaning on Brooke's tomb.
Brooke was, by his own account, an authority on British trade, and before he left for Leghorn in 1785 he was asked by Sir George Yonge to investigate British commerce in Italy and to send his remarks to the secretary of state. He arrived in Leghorn on 12 January 1786, and remained a member of the British factory there for eleven years. His Observations on the Manners and Customs of Italy [1798] were written partly to fill 'vacant hours in tedious journies, and to convey some Ideas to a friend in Switzerland [H.F.], who had an intention to make the tour of Italy with his family.' Most of the letters describe a visit Brooke made to Naples in 1794 to deliver a letter from Lord Grenville to Sir William Hamilton. Having let his house to the writer Mrs Barry (author of Maria, a Persian Slave), he set out from Leghorn at the end of March to travel via Siena and Rome to Naples. He encountered a young Swiss noblewoman carrying six large diamonds from the late French King which were 'to be delivered to his two aunts then at Rome'. Brooke arrived in Naples on 28 April and saw an eruption of Vesuvius on the night of 12-13 June. A few days later he returned to Leghorn. Brooke also had an interest in medicine and he visited various universities and hospitals in Italy. 'Yesterday,' he wrote from Rome on 1 July 1794, 'at the physical lecture, I was presented with a university degree of M.D. If diplomas denote the abilities of the man of physic, I am well furnished with such honours'. In his Observations he warmly recommended the medicinal properties of opium, to which he had been introduced by a Turk at Leghorn. The series of letters concludes with five written between July 1795 and March 1796 from Pisa, where Brooke had gone to recover from an unsuccessful operation for cataracts, and five written from Leghorn in May, September and November 1797 when, his warehouse having been seized by the French, he returned to England. He sailed from Leghorn for Genoa on 28 November and went via Turin on 'a very tedious and hazardous Journey through Savoy and France' to England. Brooke was probably also the author of the anonymous Compendium of Travels through the principal Parts of Europe, containing the Author's Journey last year from Italy through France to Paris [1799].
Thomas Brooke Esq. English gentleman' and his wife sat to Angelica Kauffman in Rome in April 1795, he dressed as a Spaniard in black, she as a muse; the portraits were paid for through Thomas Jenkins, Brooke's banker, on 20 April (Kauffman 1924, 166).
Listed in Leghorn in 1743 and 1744,1 he was buried in 1747, aged 64, in the Protestant cemetery.2
On 10 November 1779 Miss Brooke was seen in Florence at Lord Cowper's by Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) who said she was 'reckoned pretty when Lady Cowper is absent'.1 She was presumably the same Miss Brooke who was in Venice with her father in April and May 1780.2 On 8 July 1780 Dr Thomas Martyn told John Strange, British resident in Venice, that he had just spent a few days in Vicenza: 'We did not see the Chevalier Brooke & his fair Daughter; but we were asked many questions about them. He passes himself off for a Knight of the Garter [a deception], & a man of profound literature. One would think one of these honours might content him.'3 He may have been the 'Brooke' being guided round Rome by Byres in December 1781,4 and the 'Cav. Bruck' reported in Rome from 22 June and 6 July 17825 and the 'Bruk e sua figlia' reported in Florence on 6 July 17826 (the coincidence of dates could easily be innaccurate reporting).

Brookes came to Rome from Naples on 24 April 1721 with a Mr Clarges (who was returning to England). That summer Richard Rawlinson found the name 'Ph. Brookes' inscribed in the entrance to the Catacombs in the church of S.Gennaro, Naples, with others including those of those of George [Viscount] Parker and his tutor Edward Wright. These three were together in Rome and visited the 'Roman College' with Rawlinson on 16 October. Brookes left Rome on 3 November, presumably following Parker to Florence. By 6 May 1722 'Mr Brookes and a lady were arrived at Bologna' (Rawlinson jnl.MSS; 24 Apr.; 12, 29 Jul.; 16 Oct.; 3 Nov. 1721; 6 May 1722).



Broughton was British consul at Venice from at least 1691 until his death, which was reported on 7 August 1716.1 Henry Newton described him as 'a very careful, diligent & honest Gentleman'.2 His wife died in Venice in 1734.3 A letter from her to Rosalba Carriera dated 5 July 1721 suggests a degree of familiarity.4

With his eldest son Delves (1767-96), Broughton was presented at the Court in Turin by John Trevor, the British envoy, on 20 November 1785.1 They were in Rome sometime during the winter of 1785-6,2 and Sir Thomas was back in England in 1787 when he remarried.



On 1 April 1718 Sir George accompanied Charles Compton and James Hay from Marseilles to Genoa and went on with them to Leghorn; he lent Compton money in France and Leghorn to the value of £100.1 The departure from France of Sir 'Robert' Brown and Mr Compton, 'two very honest gentlemen' was reported to the Pretender's Court on 5 April: they 'drank his Majesty's health and yours [the Earl of Mar's], and they design to go and see his Majesty if it be possible without danger.'2

Born at Venise of English parents, and Vice Consul to the two former Consuls', he was proposed in 1716 as a possible replacement for consul Hugh Broughton at Venice. But Alexander Cunningham, who had recommended him, changed his mind: 'he is a papist, born at Venice, keeps a billard table and a gargol for ye sailers. He had ye name of Vice Consul, but only served Mr Broughton as an interpreter' (SP 99/61, ff.209, 239; 7 Aug., 2 Oct. 1716).
John Brown was in London in June 1769, and by July had ordered a camera obscura as 'useful and necessary to a landscape painter'.1 He sailed from Falmouth on or about 13 October 1769,2 reportedly with David Erskine of Cambo, a cousin of Charles (later Cardinal) Erskine of the Rota at Rome.3  He was in Rome in 1771 (the date recorded on a lost drawing of the Villa Medici), and 1772. An album of drawings after antiquities in Rome and Florence (VAM) probably dates from these years. At Rome he met, and impressed with his draughtsmanship, Charles Townley and William Young4 (at some stage in 1772/3 Brown drew companion portraits of them both; the former in the NGS, the latter in a priv. coll.). Together they made a remarkable tour through the less familiar parts of southern Italy and they also visited Sicily and Malta, see William Young and Charles Townley. Brown made many drawings on this excursion; a few survive (BMPL; YCBA), including one dated Syracuse 10 July, and one of Agrigentum dated (in Young's hand) 3 August, dates which supplement Young's chronology of the tour. It was almost certainly on this trip that Brown contracted the malaria which ultimately killed him; Young claimed to have been the only member of the party to have escaped it,5 and Brown's illness is attested by a letter of 25 September from Thomas Jenkins in Rome to Townley at Naples in which he hoped that 'the Young artist ... will soon recover'.6 Brown remained at Naples until after 14 December,7 and probably accompanied Young to Rome at the end of the year. Brown was in Rome in 17738 and on 11 September 1773 Townley 'Paid Mr Browne owing to him 80 zech', doubtless for his drawings after antique sculpture.6 Brown appears to have stayed in Rome for three or four years, consolidating his position as a highly original artist in the circle of Fuseli and Alexander Runciman. In 1774 he sent to the RA A view of the Coliseum at Rome, and a drawing, The cave of Dionysius, at Syracuse, in Sicily. It was probably in these years that Brown made the remarkable series of proto-Romantic drawings of extreme nervous tension and expressive force, often drawing on Italian subject matter, for which he is best known (Courtauld Institute, London; Pierpont Morgan Library, New York; NGS; Cleveland MA).9  According to his obituarists, Brown became a skilled writer of Italian verse, and his fluency in the language is shown in the series of letters he wrote in the 1780s to assist Lord Monboddo who was writing a history of language and who said of Brown 'besides understanding the language perfectly [he] is more learned in the Italian Arts of Painting, Sculpture, Music and Poetry than any Man I ever met with'.10 A selection of this correspondence was published by Monboddo after Brown's death as Letters on the Poetry and Music of the Italian Opera: addressed to a Friend by the late John Brown, Painter, Edinburgh [1789, 2nd ed. 1791]. These prove him to have been a keen student of operatic performance in Rome, and provide an important account of contemporary Italian operatic conventions. On 31 August 1776 Brown's brother Murdoch, evidently passing through Italy, wrote to their father that Brown 'still continues in Florence where I believe I shall return to see him before we Sail - indeed his friends in Rome were of opinion he could not do better than remain there six mo' as he has a course of studies much different from any in Rome & equally fine if not better for his present Study than any'.11 This imples that Brown had not been long in Tuscany. He is first recorded copying in the Uffizi in November, and on 19 November Thomas Jones, arriving in Florence, met him at Hadfield's hotel (together with the architect Christopher Ebdon and the painter Hugh Primrose Dean) and accompanied him to the Uffizi.12 He appears to have settled in Florence for the rest of his Italian sojourn ('Annos plus decem in Italia, Romae praesertim Florentiaeue, degebat');13 he was copying in the Uffizi in April and May 1777, in May and August 1778, in 1779 and in January 1780. Pelli, the director of the Uffizi, described him on 8 June 1778 as being 'esatto e diligente, modesto, quiete' (which corresponds with later descriptions), and also notes that Brown 'raccoglie stampe, libri rari, e ne porta via a casse'.14 There is no evidence that he acted as dealer. At Florence he continued to work for Townley who, through Thomas Jenkins at Rome, made further payments to him on 16 June 1777.15 and may have been associated with the German community, for a posthumous encomium records that he learnt and became fluent in German there ('Germanicam quoque linguam Florentiae degens edidicit, pentissimoque sermonis hujusque nervosi virilisque fontes accessit').13  A letter written by Brown from Florence on 14 August 1779 to John Strange, the British resident at Venice, mentioned that he had made drawings for a 'Mr Burden' (Rowland Burdon of Castle Eden) which he would be sending to Venice, and begged Strange to select some, particularly 'those of the tribune of the gallery here in Florence' as a gift for the kindness Strange had shown him 'during the short time I had of frequenting your house at Venice'. This Venetian sojourn must have occurred not long before, and Brown also accompanied the Stranges to 'the country', presumably their villa in the Veneto.16 Brown is not otherwise known to have been in North Italy. Brown is last definitely recorded in Italy copying in the Uffizi in January 1780.17 A letter written by him in London to Townley dated 'London March 17, 1770' in error for 1780 (or 1781?) strongly implies that he was then back in England.6 He had completed some drawings for Townley 'but thinking they were by far too trifling in return for your kindness to me I had likewise, whilst I was at Rome made some finish'd drawings of some of the best antique heads which I knew you was fond of. Just at that time, before I had an opportunity of sending them off a gentleman chanc'd to see them and beg'd to have them. My distress'd situation at the time and my hopes of being immediately able to do them over again for you prevail'd upon me to let him have them.... I took the opportunity ... some months ago, to send you some few contours of some of the Antique statues, which I had lately done, by Mr Burden [who was back in England in, or soon after, October 1779], from whom I hope you received them long ago. I now have a great many more'. On his death in Edinburgh in 1787 the majority of the Italian drawings he had kept were purchased by William Ottley (Ottley sale, Philips, 6 Jun. 1814; many reappeared in the Thomas Lawrence sale, Christie's, 20 May 1830).

Brown went to France after resigning his parliamentary seat in May 1787. In February 1789 he wrote from Toulon that he was planning to spend the summer in Switzerland and to 'pass the ensuing winter in Italy. If I return home I have nothing to do, and here I find good climate, and amusement in seeing the various characters of different countries'.1 In Pisa in December 1790 Thomas Brand discovered 'an excellent roaring lion who whilom roard at the County Club at Cambridge, Brown the son of Capability'.2 He was conceivably the 'Monsu Brun inglese' staying by the Piazza di Spagna in Rome at Easter 1790.3

Neil Brown succeeded Hugh Broughton, who died in August 1716, as consul in Venice, a position he held for twenty-three years.1 Martin Folkes found him 'the most conversable man' and, after he had accompanied him to Padua, said that the consul 'has shown me uncommon civilitys and is one of the best sort of men in the world'.2 Lady Grisell Baillie, who had met Sir Robert Brown and his brother Neil in June 1733, advised her nephew in Venice in 1740: 'If Mr Consul Brown be alive who is a worthy honest Scots man send to him and he will do everything for you when he knows who you are.'3 Brown initially had an uneasy partnership with the British resident, Alexander Cunningham, but the situation was eased with the arrival of a new resident, Elizeus Burges, in 1719.  Burges died in November 1736 and Brown was alone for the visit of the Charles Stuart, the Young Pretender, in May 1737. The Venetians paid conspicuous court to him, but Brown requested that the Jacobite Prince should be expelled; a diplomatic crisis ensued in which the Venetian Ambassador in London was expelled.4 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu then said the consul was 'a fool and doted with age',5 yet she subsequently held him in some esteem. He was 'a good scholar' who had lent her his Horace; in October 1739 she described 'Our English Consul, who has resided, as he says, this 40 years, is as chearfull an old Man as ever I saw', and at his death in Venice in June 1740 she described him as 'much esteem'd'.6


Robert Brown was said to have first gone to Venice as a young man 'with no other capital than a large second-hand wig, which he sold for 5£' (DNB). He may have been the Robert Brown in Padua in March 1705.1 By 1711 he had amassed a fortune and was well-established as a merchant in Venice.2 At Easter 1725 he married Margaret Cecil in Paris, as he was accompanying her and her brother, Charles, to Venice. She had carefully enquired as to his security and had told Thomas Coke just before the wedding that she was not 'so smitten as not to have my ear open'. On Christmas Day 1725 she gave birth to their first child, a daughter.  They lived in some style in Venice and owned a country house at Paluello, 'the pleasantest situated I ever saw', wrote Charles Cecil, 'upon the river Brenta, 8 miles from Padua and 20 from Venice'.3 Mrs Brown sat to Rosalba Carriera, as she told Coke on 12 April 1726: 'You will by the next ship that sails from hence have the face of your humble servant done by Rosalba, who assures me she never painted a picture better, and it was done for so good a friend, I behaved myself very patiently in sitting, and she commended me so much for it that she acknowledged if it was not like, it would be entirely her fault'.4 It was presumably during their time in Italy that the Browns acquired the pictures which subsequently passed to Humphry Morice, listed in 1787 as 'The Long Canaletti', the St John the Baptist, the formation of Eve, the Deluge and that call'd Carlo-Dolce, which was believed a true picture'.5  Brown's prosperity did not escape criticism. In 1719 he was accused of malpractice by Alexander Cunningham (perhaps a dubious witness since he was about to lose his diplomatic post); Brown allegedly had bribed the 4th Earl of Manchester's servants to run goods, had kept a profitable gaming house, and offered bribes for diplomatic preferment.6 He was subsequently known for his avarice,7 yet he was made a Baronet in March 1732. He was frequently mentioned by travellers in connection with his brother, consul Neil Brown: in June 1733 the Baillie family dined with both in Padua8 and Martin Folkes saw them at Paluello in October 1733.9 In April 1734 Sir Robert was assured of a seat at the next Parliament and his wife told the Earl of Essex that they proposed to be in London before the next session and would visit Turin en route.10 The family (there were then three daughters) left Venice in September 1734.11 In London Lady Margaret's Sunday evening concerts of Italianate music became, according to Horace Walpole, 'the great mart for all traveling and travelled calves'.

Mr Brown Secretary to [William] Hamilton' received payments from Charles Townley on 31 March 1768;1 in December Mr and Mrs Brown were paid for services performed for Sir Watkin Williams Wynn.2
In December 1782 Brown, an acquaintance of Lord Algernon Percy, was in Rome; in March 1783 John Ramsay saw a portrait of Mr Brown, 'very like' in H.D. Hamilton's studio.1 On 5 February 1783 Charles Parker was complaining that a Mr Brown had rummaged through all the book shops in Rome before him.2
He embarked at Harwich with Humphrey Chetham who was returning to Leghorn with Basil Kennett and George Constantine (Chetham jnl.MSS).
In 1697 at Rome Browne was described by Sir John Clerk, who had taken rooms with him, as an English tailor in the via Condotti.1 In 1705 and 1708 'Carlo Bruni' had an hotel in the Strada della Croce,2 and in 1712 'at Serena Near Piazza di Spagna'.3 His clients included the Blathwayt brothers and their tutor, de Blainville, whose detailed accounts from 27 April to November 1707 are signed 'Charles Browne'. In February 1710 Sir William Wentworth was advised by his kinsman Lord Raby 'to lodge at one Charles Brown's, a Scotchman, who has the best lodgings in Rome, and is a very honest man and ready to assist his lodgers. tho' I believe he is a little dear, however 'tis agreeable to have the help of one that knows the town as well and is one's countryman and honest, which is a rare thing amongst the Italians.'4  In August 1702 Browne gave evidence at the enquiry into the death of the Hon. Charles Cecil, the Duke of Shrewsbury having requested that he enquire into the possibility that Cecil had been murdered. Shrewsbury mentioned Browne several times in his journal: Browne reported to him on the 'madman' Williamson (see Davenport) in May 1704, he witnessed the Duke's will in August, and he brought an English 'strongman' to him in November.5
Mons.Hanckins Bronne' arrived in Venice on 28 April 1776.1 He was said to have started a grand tour in 1775 visiting France, Switzerland, Italy and Germany, 'residing for some time in the Courts of their principal sovereigns. His letters ... are replete with original and judicious observations, on political, moral, and religious subjects.'2 He had been in Switzerland in 1772 with J.B. Durade, Lewis Thomas Watson, Thomas Orde, and the 3rd Baron Monson,3 most of whom went on to Italy.
Besides being a successful banker, Lyde Browne was an antiquarian of repute who formed a remarkable collection of classical sculpture. Although his pieces were acquired in Italy, he appears to have spent little time there himself, his purchases being made through agents in Rome. He was first in Italy with his wife in 1753, but little is known of their visit. They were apparently in Turin on 18 October when, at the request of Lady Rochford (wife of the British envoy), George Charles recommended Lyde Browne to Horace Mann in Florence: 'you cannot oblige Mr Brown any way so sensibly as by laying him on the Scent of Antiquities, for he is a member of the Antiquarian Society at London.'1 In the course of this first visit Browne apparently secured the services of the sculptor Simon Vierpyl to act as his buying agent in Rome.2  Browne and his wife were again in Italy in 1776. 'Mons. Browne' arrived in Venice on 16 May3 and Thomas Jones waited on him and his family in Rome on 18 December.4 A portrait believed to be of Mrs Browne was painted by Batoni in Rome in 1778 (Clark/Bowron 408; priv. coll.). It was after this second visit that Browne told Charles Townley there was not 'a sculptors shop in Rome which I have not visited.... Cavaceppi has little & tho I shall lay out some money with Piranesi, yet you know they are but Pasticcios'.5  Meanwhile after Vierpyl had left Rome in 1756, the Abbé William Wilkins (d. 1758), had briefly acted as Browne's adviser.2 Browne then became one of Thomas Jenkins's greatest clients, not that that prevented him from buying also from Gavin Hamilton.6 Two catalogues of Browne's collection were published, in 1768 (81 pieces) and 1779 (230 pieces). In 1784 Browne sold part of his collection to Catherine the Great in St Petersburg7 but, through the bankruptcy of his agent, he received only £10,000 of the agreed £23,000. Greatly depressed by the loss, he died shortly afterwards. The remainder of his collection was dispersed at Christie's in 1788 (30 May).




Sir John Brownlow was in Padua on 3 December 1710, and his governor, R. Latreille ('R. La Preille Gallo Anglus') on the following day.1 On 5 December they arrived in Venice for the Carnival.2 By April they were in Rome, staying in the Strada Vittoria.3 John Bellings called on them on the 6th.4 Later that month Brownlow and 'Mons. de Latreille' went to Naples and they were back in Rome by 10 May; Brownlow took his final leave of Bellings at Rome on 3 July.4
The musical 'little Brownlow' was in Florence by July 17441 and went on to spend four years in Italy, studying music. In the spring of 1748 snow delayed his departure from Florence; 'tell Mr Chute this,' Horace Mann told Horace Walpole, 'as he loves that harmonious little man, and will be glad to see and hear him play in England.'2  In 1762 the Abbé Grant recalled Brownlow's visit to Italy. Writing from Rome, he was requesting help from James Grant of Castle Grant for an Italian, Signor Felice Dona, 'maestro di Capella and the best player on the Harpsicord that Italy now affords': he had been 'master to Mr Brownlowe who is reckoned the best performer on the Harpsicord perhapps of any gentleman now any where Mr Brownlowe you know is an Irish gentleman of a large fortune in the country of Armagh, and he assured me when he was learning from him and he was then a great player, that he had in a short time reaped more benefit from his instruction, than he had done for two years from the greatest masters at Naples'.3

A Radcliffe travelling scholar (see John Monro), he was in Padua on 21 December 1716 (Brown 1523).

At the age of sixteen Lord Bruce set off for Italy with the Rev. Thomas Brand (c.1751-1814), whose letters describe their tour (Brand letters MSS; dates given in brackets; Lord Bruce's letters are HMC Ailesbury). 'Health is our only pretext for travelling', he explained, and already after a six-week tour in Switzerland he found 'Lord Bruce's health is amazingly improv'd' (C 25 Sep. 1790). They were to spend five years in Italy and Lord Bruce would return a married man and a father. By October 1790 they were in Turin, where they stayed longer than necessary 'for Ld Bruce to make his bows to the King & Princes & Princesses'; Bruce was much impressed with the palaces 'which realize the descriptions in Fairy tales & Enchantments: it almost made him consider the proprietors as something above the Vulgar' (E 13 Oct. 1790). They went on to Genoa, where Lord Bruce exploited the privilege accorded to the son of a British peer by entering the city after the gates are shut, in order to attend an opera and a French play at Rivarola; Lady Knight, who accompanied them, introduced the 'Grimaldis & Spinolas and Balbis & Durazzos and all the rest of the great families of Genoa' (ibid.). By 13 October they had reached Milan, where they were 'very graciously receiv'd by the Archduke & Duchess' (ibid.). Lord Bruce, who loved opera as dearly 'as Squire Humfrey did Applepye' (C 2 Dec. 1790), then insisted on a detour to Bologna to hear the tenor David, before going on to Florence. There they heard Crescentini sing and met Lady Cowper, the Knights and the Berry family (ibid.). They passed the winter months in Pisa where, although 'the best of our foreigners are gone to Rome', there were 'still 4 or 5 houses where we can get a dish of tea & harmless conversation & we can go now & then into Italian company'; they took half Mary Berry's box for the Carnival season at the theatre and saw a burletta by Fabrizi (C 27 Dec. 1790).  A remarkable episode occured in the spring at Siena, where Brand took Lord Bruce to meet 'an old Lady to whom Ld Ailesbury [Lord Bruce's father, see Thomas, Baron Bruce] was Cavalier Servente Thirty Nine years ago. She gave us many anecdotes of Ld. A's Sienna life which perhaps had better been concealed'; the lady urged Lord Bruce to emulate his father, 'the very reflexion', wrote Brand, 'I wished to avoid'.1 In April they paid a three-week visit to Rome to see the Easter celebrations, and Thomas Jenkins attended Lord Bruce as he witnessed the ceremony of the Pope washing the pilgrims' feet (E 23 Apr. 1791). On the journey back to Florence Brand reflected upon his 'indolent & incurious companion', who had, however, reacted to the picturesque beauties of Tuscany (E 30 May 1791). They passed a quiet agreeable time in Florence, reading in the morning, sleeping at noon, walking in the afternoon and attending the theatre in the evening, before going north in June via Bologna and Milan to Innsbruck (E Jun. 1791). They returned to Italy in September, travelling down through Verona and Venice (where they again encountered the Berrys, then returning to England) to Leghorn. By December 1791 they had passed through Rome to Naples. Lady Malmesbury then described Lord Bruce as 'a sad goose, but a good-humoured creature, and desperately in love with the Duchess of Fleury[;] it is quite melancholy. Lord Malmesbury says he is in love like a rabbit with a bunch of parsley'.2 In March and April they toured Sicily, Lord Bruce on horseback and Brand in a sedan; Bruce had wanted to go on to Malta but, having set sail, 'my poor young man in about half an hour was seiz'd with so dreadful a sea-sickness that after struggling an hour he fairly cried out for mercy' and they returned to Sicily (E 8 Apr. 1792). Both were impressed by Sicily and commissioned views of the island from Lusieri ('Don Tito'). They also bought in 1792 two copies by John Rouby after Schidone and pendants by Seydelmann after Raphael (A 15 Jan. 1793). In May 1792 they returned north; on 9 May they were in Rome and on the 21st in Bologna. They were doubtless the 'Milord Brune con copagno Mons. Bramnte' who arrived in Venice on 24 May and were in Udine on 6 June.3 They were in Vienna by July.  They had returned to Florence by October 1792, when Brand observed that the Bishop of Winchester (Brownlow North) and his wife (an unhappy couple) were paying Lord Bruce particular attention (A 16 Oct. 1792). By December they were again in Naples, where Lord Bruce bought 'a most beautiful drawing by [Lusieri] of the Temple of Proserpine at the Lago d'Averno' (A 11 Dec. 1792) but, more significantly, he met and fell in love with Henrietta Hill. She was staying in Naples at the same hotel with her younger sisters and her mother, Lady Berwick. There was a joint excursion to Baiae and Cumae early in January, in the course of which Lord Bruce gallantly rescued Henrietta from a bucking horse, arriving 'just in time to receive her in his arms'; Brand advised Lord Ailesbury that sentiments 'were evidently in a state of progression' and sought his approval (A 15 Jan. 1793). By 27 April, in Florence, the twenty-year-old Lord Bruce had been accepted, and on 20 May Brand married them at La Quercia, outside Florence, in the presence of Lord John and Lady Elizabeth Hervey, Henry Monck and his wife, Lady Elizabeth, and Lady Berwick and her daughters (A 21 May 1793). The new Lady Bruce immediately sat to Angelica Kauffman for her portrait (priv. coll.); it shows her holding a lyre crowned with roses; 'I never saw any portrait of hers with so much truth and character', wrote Brand (A 8 Jun. 1793). On 2 July Lord Bruce told his father he was having another portrait of Lady Bruce made by Gauffier, 'one of those that were obliged to leave Rome on account of the disturbances', and on 6 August he was himself sitting to Gauffier for 'as complete a likeness as Lady Bruce's. Beyond it', wrote Brand, 'art cannot go' (6 Aug. 1793 A; both portraits sold Sotheby's, 6 Jul. 1966; his portrait resold Christie's, 6 Apr. 1973). They were in Parma visiting Bodoni in September 1793,4 and in Rome in November they were briefly joined by Lady Bruce's brother, Lord Berwick. It appears that Lord Bruce also sat in Rome to Hugh Robinson, in whose studio Sarah Bentham saw his portrait in December 17935 (possibly the whole-length of Lord Bruce now in a priv. coll.). By 16 November they were back in Naples for the winter.  Lusieri had spent the summer in Sicily working for Lord Bruce and Sir Richard Colt Hoare; 'I still admire [his] drawings more than any', Bruce told his father, while particularly praising a view of the Three Temples at Paestum (A 23 Nov. 1793). Lady Bruce, whose own beauty was 'highly spoken of', was 'gratified' to see Lady Hamilton perform her 'Attitudes' (A 26 Nov. 1793, and Lord Bruce, 7 Dec. 1793). Thomas Brand, meanwhile, continued his belle amitié for Lady Webster-'rather sentimentally tiresome', and Lord Digby 'fell in love with' Lady Bruce, 'who only coquets with him'.6 In March 1794 Lord Bruce told his father they had dined with the King of Naples (1 Mar. 1794) and in April they returned to Florence, where on 10 May Lady Bruce gave birth to twin daughters. On 6 July Lord Bruce and Brand were said to be ('have been'?) in Rome.7  As the threat of French invasion loomed, Lord and Lady Bruce in Leghorn remained undecided whether to travel north or south (E 4 Oct. 1794). On 13 November they were in Rome, Brand meanwhile having set off home alone through Germany. Lady Knight found them 'a very agreeable couple' with 'a beautiful pair of twins', soon to be joined by Lady Berwick and her two remaining daughters from Turin.8 By December Lord Bruce's portrait by Angelica Kauffman was far advanced9 (showing him in Spanish dress, a map of Sicily on a table beside him; it was paid for on 27 May 1795; priv. coll.).10 The Bruces had been reported in Naples in December 1794;11 they were in Venice in May 1795,12 and by the end of the year they were back in England.13 On 6 July 1796 Lady Berwick, in Naples, told Lady Bruce that she had 'got a little view of a well known spot for you' by the 'moonlight man'.14 In 1797 the Bruces commissioned several copies from John Rouby in Rome (including heads from the antique and Titian's Danae) which Patrick Moir forwarded for them.15
Lord Bruce arrived in Venice with 'Fergeston' on 15 December 1781.1 On 26 March 1782 Lord Bruce and Ferguson were presented at Court in Turin.2
James Bruce, the explorer of Africa, loomed rather larger than life to his contemporaries. He was, said Fanny Burney, 'the tallest man you ever saw in your life - at least gratis', and Zoffany thought him 'the wonder of his age'. By 1760 Bruce had become a man of independent means (through the mineral resources of his Kinnaird estate) and in 1763, having regard to his wide interests in languages and antiquity, he was appointed British consul in Algiers where, it was thought, he could record the classical remains. His passage out was leisurely and he spent nearly a year in Italy studying antiquities, making copious notes as he went. His movements were described by Alexander Murray in his preface to Bruce's Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile. Bruce came to Turin on 15 July 1762 and went directly to Rome. There he became a friend of Andrew Lumisden and sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 257; Broom Hall) who, he told his fiancée, Margaret Murray of Polmaise, was 'the best painter in Italy'; he was having a miniature copy made 'by the best painter of miniatures in Italy, who is a lady [Victoria Stern]'.1 He visited Leghorn but was back in Rome in September, and 'the three following months he spent chiefly in Florence' developing his skill as a draughtsman. He also acquired some views of the ruins at Paestum, drawn by a Spanish officer, which led him to conceive an illustrated publication of that still unfamiliar site. By January 1763 Bruce had been ordered to Naples to await further diplomatic instructions. He suggested to the British ambassador there, Sir James Gray, that he might write a description of Paestum, but Gray declined while encouraging Bruce to go there himself. Bruce duly crossed the difficult marshland to Paestum and surveyed the three Doric temples. He returned to Rome and then to Florence, where he prepared his publication. He engaged Zocchi to design a frontispiece and Robert Strange to engrave his drawings. But in March Bruce was instructed to sail to Algiers from Leghorn and his Paestum project receded. Some of the material he gathered, together with a notebook of his Italian travels, is now in the YCBA (further drawings and manuscripts remain at Broomhall).2 Although he was himself a competent draughtsman, Bruce had asked Andrew Lumisden to find an artist willing to accompany him in Africa.3 George Dance, Stern and d'Estang were unwilling, but the young Bolognese artist Luigi Balugani accepted, joining Bruce in Algiers by July 1765 (and later meeting his death in Abyssinia in February 1771).4 Bruce returned from Africa in 1773, landing first in Marseilles in March. Later that year he decided to return to Italy to try the baths at Poretta, his health not fully recovered after his African adventures. He was also anxious to find Italian artists to complete the drawings he had brought back with him from his explorations, but here he met with some initial difficulties, being accused in Bologna of maltreating Balugani.5 He also discovered that his fiancée had come out to Italy but, despairing of his return, had married the marchese Accaromboni-with whom Bruce subsequently had a robust correspondence, see Margaret Murray. These incidents apart, Bruce was lionised in Italy. In Florence in October Horace Mann presented him to the Grand Duke,6 and on 4 December he received an audience from the Pope.7 By 7 January 1774 he was back in Florence, intending to set out for England the next day (he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno on 13 January).8 Meanwhile there had been time enough at Florence for him to sit to Zoffany for inclusion in the Tribuna (Windsor). By 29 January he was in Venice.9  Mann said that the Pope had given Bruce a series of his gold and silver medals,10 and he also brought back for the King a case from Lord Cowper, containing the miniature pictures of painters in the Grand Duke's Gallery. These gifts, and the quantity of drawings from his travels, led him to ask Lord North (through Zoffany and Sir Joseph Banks) if his artistic baggage could pass unmolested through the English custom house.11 In London Bruce's accounts of his adventures were generally considered 'more wonderful than those of Sinbad the Sailor and perhaps as true'.12

Robert Bruce was a discerning collector of contemporary pictures and sculpture during a stay of some eighteenth months at Rome. He had arrived at Genoa early in 1700, and immediately found a battle scene by Giulio Romano 'which pleased me wonderfully, and answered the idea that I had of what spirit and fire I should find in his works'.1 He was in Rome by 17 April 1700, staying in the Piazza Rotonda and from that date until 14 May 1701 he made frequent purchases of drawings and prints, and also bought some sculpture; a last purchase of prints after Polidoro was made in August 1701. From the dealer Antonio he bought drawings by Carlo [Maratti] and Salviati, reliefs by Fiammingo [Duquesnoy] and Algardi, a head by Algardi, and paintings by Filippo Laura and Crescenti [Crescenzio Onofrio]. From unspecified sources he acquired drawings by Raphael2 (one of which is now BMPL), Claude, Poussin, Albani, Sacchi, and '100 drawings in a book of Mola'. A draft letter, offering to buy 'your School of Athens' previously offered to the Duke of Devonshire, is addressed to G. Gibbons.
Lord Bruce spent two years in Italy with his tutor, the Rev. Thomas Lipyeatt. By Easter 1751 Bruce was staying at Rome in the Casa Guarnieri, and he was listed at the same address the following Easter.1 He became a member of Lord Charlemont's lively and artistic circle. Both he and Lipyeatt subscribed to Charlemont's plan for an academy for British artists in Rome, and Bruce was to have played the role of Liberty on Charlemont's 'Triumphal Car' for the 1752 Carnival (see Charlemont). Like most members of that coterie, he was several times caricatured: in a group by by P.L. Ghezzi (with the 3rd Viscount Midleton, Joseph Henry and Henry Martin; Philadelphia MA) and by Joshua Reynolds in his Parody of the School of Athens (1751; NGI) and (as an 'eloquent beanpole') in his Four Learned Milordi (NGI).  On 26 September 1751 Lord Bruce was making a bet with Charlemont at Lucca.2 Thomas Scrope reported him in Venice in January 1752.3 In May he joined an excursion in the Roman Campagna with Scrope, Benjamin Lethieullier, Lascelles Iremonger and Sir Thomas Kennedy, and by June they had all gone on to Naples.4 Pancrazi dedicated a plate to Bruce in his Antichità Siciliane published in Naples in 1751-2. In August 1752 Horace Mann described how at Florence 'the quiet Lord Bruce' enjoyed the swagger of the 'roaring rich West Indian', William Young; in October Mann said he had just come from Lucca and was spending ten days in Florence before going on to Milan, 'where crowds of English will winter'.5  On 18 June 1753 Lord Bruce was in Padua6 and on 8 August he was writing to Charlemont from Siena. 'Your favour of the seventh of June ... pursuing me from Bologna to Padua to Bologna and afterwards to Florence, reached me last post at Siena'; he went on to say that his clothes had already been sent on to Vienna-'don't you pity a man, who is not to pass the next winter in Italy and is to pass it in Germany?' The same letter also explained that Lipyeatt was obliged to return to England, but 'a younger brother of his [probably Jonathan Lipyeatt] will be in Italy soon to accompany me in my tour through Germany'.7 He was probably thinking particularly of Siena, where it appears he had acted as cicisbeo to a lady whom his son was to meet thirty-nine years later, see Charles, Lord Bruce. When Lord Bruce returned home in October 1753 he was said to have 'been all over Holland and Germany, and visited Sweden, Denmark and Russia'.8
"'Miss Bruce' was in Rome in 1746 and known to Alexander Cozens who wrote her name in a sketchbook (YCBA) as someone to visit; she may have been his pupil or his teacher.1 Horace Mann wrote in April 1750 that she 'was sent to Italy some years ago to learn painting, [and] could not bear the filthy figures in the Gallery. She was even offended at two little naked angels which I had got copied from a picture of Raphael [Madonna under a Baldacchino, Pitti Pal.], who were learning their hallelujah, because both hands were employed in holding the scroll. ""The pecture may be gud,"" said she, ""but in troth, it makes one seck to see such endecencies."" She was a virgin of about 30, went from hence [Florence] to Rome, and married a great Irishman, to remove all her scruples at once'.2"
On 9 September 1757 Mr Bruce and Mr Stuart 'gentlemen of good family and much merit', were given a letter of introduction from Horace Mann to Cardinal Albani in Rome.1 In 1758 'Sig're Brus' and 'Sig're [E]uard' were lodging near the Piazza di Spagna, Rome.2
The brothers George and James Brudenell, both Catholics, were sent to Italy by their grandfather with a tutor, Henry Cuffand; their older cousin, the Duke of Shrewsbury, was already in Rome.1 They had reached Rome by 16 June 1703 and took lodgings in the Corso. Shrewsbury introduced them to Italian nobility and other travellers, such as the Marquess of Huntly, Lord Quarendon and the Duke of Norfolk. For exercise they went on shooting expeditions with the Jesuits. Within two months of their arrival they learned of their grandfather's death, as a result of which George Brudenell became the Earl of Cardigan. Their allowances were increased (£1,200 for the Earl and £300 for his brother) and when their mourning was over they took grander rooms near the Trajan Column. On 2 February 1704 they gave an entertainment for the entire English colony. Cardigan offended the Countess Adelaide Paleotti (Shrewsbury's future wife) and James proved difficult. Despite Jacobite encouragement they did not obtain a private audience with the Pope. In all of this Shrewsbury was much exercised and he was presumably pleased to allow Cardigan to leave Rome on 15 September 1704 for Venice and Vienna. The brothers stopped at Padua on 24 September2 and reached Venice on the 27th. Cardigan fell ill with smallpox and he was still there in June 1705, keeping a mistress ('She is very old and ugly, and has quartered for several years all comers and goers,' said Lord Irwin), when Shrewsbury was trying to persuade him to return home. But it was not until February 1706 that the brothers left;3 with their tutor and 'La Kecka', the Venetian mistress, they eventually arrived in England on 29 April 1706. When Cardigan redecorated and modernized Deene in 1707 and 1708, 'several marble chimney pieces were put in', including, doubtless, the four designed and cut for him in Rome which were sent off in September 1704. His house in Lincoln's Inn Fields was replaced with one built to designs obtained in August 1704 from an unnamed architect in Rome.

At the age of seventeen Lord Brudenell was sent abroad with his tutor Henry Lyte.1 By November 1751 they were in Paris, where they appear to have stayed some considerable time before arriving in Genoa in December 1754. Their Italian tour was to be remarkable both for the itinerary, which led them to hitherto unfamiliar areas, and for their extensive patronage of Italian artists. But when Robert Adam first saw them in the Balbi Palace he thought Brudenell 'a stupid meaningless creature [who] has not the mein of a tailor nor the spirit of a louse', although Lyte appeared to be 'a clever-like fellow'.2 By contrast Lyte, while at times vexed by Brudenell's dilatory and original behaviour, described his charge as 'a good observer both of Men & Things, but avoids the former a little too much. Tho' when they happen to fall in his way He will see as far into them in half an hour, as most other young men will in half a year' (11 Feb. 1758). They were expected in Rome in the autumn of 17553 (when Adam told his family that Brudenell wanted, but couldn't have, his apartment on the Strada Felice), but it was April 1756 before they finally arrived. They stayed only for Holy Week before proceeding to Naples, where they lodged with Sir William Stanhope 'and our consul Mr Jemineau' (27 Apr. 1756) and where they were to remain based for a year. Despite Lyte's inclination to return to Rome, Brudenell explored Magna Graecia and he was amongst the first travellers to see the newly discovered Doric temples at Paestum (15 Jun.). They visited Ischia twice, on 25 May and, with Jamineau, on 8 August, and they went on to Malta and Sicily, where Girgenti 'pleases my lord Brudenell and me beyond measure' (3 Nov.). They had spent two weeks in Palermo before returning to Naples on 25 November (30 Nov.). It had originally been agreed with his father (Lord Cardigan) that Brudenell should return to Paris for the winter, but this was prevented by the outbreak of the Seven Years War (8 Jun.); Cardigan eventually agreed they should stay in Italy (30 Nov.). They were expected back in Rome in December 1756,4 'where', Lyte confessed to Cardigan, 'your Lordship had all the reason in the World to imagine we were arriv'd some months since' (5 Apr. 1757), but Brudenell stayed in Naples. 'It would have been both more entertaining and improving to my Lord Brudenell, had he pass'd the three or four last months at Rome, instead of continuing so long in this part of the World, but his Lordship is of a different opinion, having seen, he says, as much as He desires of Rome' (18 Apr. 1757). On 27 April Brudenell set out on a Calabrian expedition to Taranto, which he later discussed with Winckelmann.5 They then returned to Rome, though they were to pay another fifteen-day visit to Naples in February 1758 (7 Feb. 1758). Back at Rome, where they stayed in the Casa Guarnieri,6 Lyte became both agent and connoisseur for Brudenell and Lord Cardigan. He had already tried unsuccessfully in 1757 to acquire works by Correggio from Parma (14 Mar. 1757), and by Guido Reni and Albani from the Sampieri collection in Bologna (19 Jul. 1756); now he approached Thomas Jenkins, 'very skilfull in his profession and a worthy honest man' (8 Mar. 1758). 'Piranesi, Russel, Jenkins, and their crew ... had so prepossessed my lord Brudenell', complained John Parker to Lord Charlemont, 'that I could never get admittance ... to his lordship (with whom the year before I had dined several times, invited by his lordship)'.7 Of contemporary artists, Brudenell had visited Jonathan Skelton by 20 August (though he had at first been deterred by the artist's association with Andrew Lumisden),8 and he sat to both Batoni (for a half-length) and Mengs (a whole-length). 'They have promised to finish them out of hand and they will both be fine pictures', Lyte reported (8 Mar. 1758), 'the more so as there is a great emulation between those two celebrated painters'. Mengs showed him whole-length, in his study before a bust of Cicero (Boughton), Batoni half-length with a lute and the score of a Corelli violin sonata (Clark/Bowron 202; Boughton) and the portraits were finished by 21 June. Mengs also painted a half-length portrait of Brudenell (Beaulieu) and a head of Lyte (Brinsley Ford coll.). In Naples Brudenell had already (it appears) commissioned from Antonio Joli at least thirty-eight French, Italian and Sicilian views (of which sixteen remain at Beaulieu and eight at Bowhill) and large pendant views of Vesuvius and Naples from Carlo Bonavia (Beaulieu and Bowhill).9  Older masters were not neglected. Brudenell bought a huge Giordano Truth finding Fortune in the Sea (Drumlanrig) for £50; 'he has for once passed over the limits prescribed him', commented Lyte (8 Mar. 1758), 'which he will avoid doing in his future purchases as I most certainly shall'. Lyte bought a little Annibale Carracci for Lord Cardigan (8 March), and a copy of Raphael's Uffizi Self portrait by Jenkins. By 21 June works by Titian ('representing [as they say] A Mistress of the Duke of Ferrara') and Raphael had been acquired, 'so that your Lordship now has a picture of each of the three great masters (Titian, Raphael and Annibale Carracci) which we think ourselves happy in having procured for you, the like of which we should not be able to meet with in many years'; all were to be sent back to England with the portraits by Mengs and Batoni 'on the next convoy' (21 Jun.). 'Three Antique heads, two of which are as fine as any in the world' had been bought by 3 May 1758, and modern bronze copies of the centaurs from Hadrian's Villa (Lyte helpfully explaining, 1 Jul. 1758, that he would keep them himself if his Lordship did not take them), and on 8 July Lyte described an antique bronze group he had bought from Jenkins: 'the scarcity of these kind of things is inconceivable and the price they ask for them by no means moderate'. He was still trying to acquire some mosaic tables. Four export licences were granted to Lyte and Brudenell between 12 May 1758 and 22 January 1759, nearly all the items being antique marbles (totalling over thirty pieces).10 On 27 September 1758 Brudenell and Lyte had 'lately' left Rome for Venice on their way home.11  Lady Mary Wortley Montagu observed them in Venice. On 3 October she wrote they had been there a fortnight; on 31 December she described Brudenell as appearing to be 'in a very bad state of Health, and extreme unwilling to return to England ... He seems highly dispos'd to, if not actually fallen into, a Consumption'. Later, on 24 June 1759, he was in Padua, where he seemed 'to have no Desire of seeing his Native Land'.12 While he was in Venice Brudenell became one of Guardi's earliest British patrons, acquiring a set of six Venetian views (of which four remain at Bowhill).13 Clérisseau had shown him his drawings of the temples at Pola, and Brudenell was remembered by his Venetian landlady, la Mingotte, as one who 'read three hours at a time without a word from anyone'. He left Venice on 24 February 1760, when Lady Mary again described him as 'singular both in his manner and Sentiments ... too Indolent to dispute with any body and appears indifferent to our Sex'.14 The last entry of Lord Brudenell's travel accounts is dated 1760, and indicates that his years on the Continent had cost just over £12,600.15
Robert Brudenell was elected to the Accademia del Disegno in Florence on 6 October 1705 as a 'Dilettante' (a serious student, but not a practising artist), and paid his fees in Florence on 4 February 1711.1  A Robert Brudenell was John Molesworth's secretary when the latter was envoy at Turin from 1720-2.2
Brummel was said to be in Rome with Frederick North, British minister in Corsica, in 1795 'at the latter end of the winter'1 (North was in Rome by May 1795). On 29 March 1797 John Rushout left Naples 'by the post in Mr Brummel's carriage to Terracina',2 and in May Brummel, with William Hillary, was complaining of the lack of servants in Naples.3



Brydone had spent much of his time in Switzerland from 1765, experimenting with electricity. In 1769-71 he travelled in Italy as bear-leader to William Fullarton. They were in Florence in November 17691 and in Naples the following May. Between 14 May and 1 August they toured Sicily and Malta, accompanied by a Mr Glover. On returning to Naples on 1 August 1770 Brydone was proposing to spend the winter in Rome before returning to Switzerland via 'Loreto, Bologna, &c & c; the old beaten track'.2  In 1773 Brydone published his Tour through Sicily and Malta describing his journey in the form of letters addressed to William Beckford of Somerley, who 'had ever neglected the island of Sicily'. Brydone explained how he had been 'animated' by a similar journey undertaken by William and Mrs Hamilton with Lord Fortrose in the summer of 1769.3 His Tour, a careful compilation with copious classical references and scientific data, contained several descriptions of the wild landscape; from the top of Mount Etna 'no imagination has dared to form an idea of so glorious and magnificent a scene. Neither is there on the surface of the globe any one point that unites so many awful and sublime objects ..'. The Tour achieved great popularity, despite which both the 10th Earl of Pembroke4 and Charles Parker5 pronounced it unreliable. George Tatem, a former consul in Sicily, called it 'a romance' which, by publishing unguarded conversations with priests and others, had done harm, making Sicilians afraid to speak with travellers.6 Some of Brydone's travel journals are among the Blair Adam MSS (SRO).
The 3rd Duke of Buccleuch and his Duchess were in Italy with two of their daughters (they had four: Mary, 1769-1823, m. 1791 3rd E. of Courtown; Elizabeth, 1770-1837, m. 1798 10th E. of Home; Caroline, 1774-1854, m. 1803 6th M. of Queensberry, and Harriet, 1780-1833, m. 1806 6th M. of Lothian). They were in Naples on 18 January 1787,1 and in Rome for Holy Week.2 On 22 April they arrived in Venice,3 and were entertained in Vicenza where, on 30 May, James Smith discovered 'a splendid memorial, just erected, of the Duke of Buccleuch's having lately been entertained there'.4

Buchanan' was to accompany William Beckford of Somerley and the artist George Robertson on a journey from Rome to Russia in 1771,1 but on 30 September Byres wrote that 'Mr Beckford & Mrs Buchanan proceeded no further on their Russia expedition than Hamburgh'.2

Buckingham returned to Italy in the autumn of 1735 seriously ill with consumption and nursed by Mrs Henrietta Pratt, a friend of his mother. On 30 October Charles Fane wrote (retrospectively) from Florence that 'the Duke of Buckingham is set out for Naples where the air must do a miracle if it recovers him being seemingly in a very deep decay.'1 He died on 10 November in Rome, three days after his arrival there, 'd'etisie [rapid consumption]; c'était un seigneur tout jeune et très riche'.2 His body was returned to England and buried in Westminster Abbey on 31 January 1736.3
As half-sister of James Stuart, the Pretender, she was inordinately proud of her birth and 'never ceased labouring to restore the House of Stuart'.1 By 1714 she was being used as a courier between England and the exiled Stuart Court at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, and when the Court moved to Rome in 1717 'she went two or three times to see her brother, and to carry on negotiations with him for his interest'.2 The Duchess was expected in Rome at the end of December 1730 with Edmund, her only surviving son from her marriage to the Duke of Buckingham; Belloni, the Roman banker, had rented for her the Raggi Palace on the Corso.3 Stosch reported how the Duchess had taken 'the most magnificent box at the Aliberti opera, facing the Pretender's. At the end of the opera her valets came with four torches right up to her box, which caused a fight with the soldiers of the guard, who had received orders not to let torches be brought up to the boxes for fear of fire. The Roman ladies did not visit her in her box as she had not announced her arrival in Rome to them in the customary fashion. The Pretender not pleased with her haughty behaviour and has not yet spoken to her'.4 On 21 January 1731 Stosch was held up in his carriage by armed men and warned to leave Rome within eight days on pain of death; he suspected the Duchess, and when next day she sent a servant to him, to enquire if he would sell her an engraved stone for £10, he noticed that the man 'changed colour twenty times in a quarter of an hour' on finding him in bed surrounded by firearms of all calibres.5 While in Rome the Duchess sat to the French sculptor Bouchardon, who had completed 'le portrait' in April 1732.6  At the end of March 1731 the Duchess rented for a year the Palazzo Galoppi in Florence,7 but in mid-June she and her son (the 2nd Duke of Buckingham) left Florence for Bologna to attend the opera.8 They went on to Venice where Elizeus Burges reported on 13 July: 'The Dutchess of Buckingham and her son went from hence last week. They staid but five or six daies here, and are gone to Spaa ... There is one Mrs Pratt with her Grace, who I doubt is a little inclin'd to Jacobitism ... She is gone to Spaa with the Duke'.9  The Duchess probably returned to Italy; Stosch wrote on 22 September 1736 that she was expected shortly in Rome,10 and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu wrote on 2 October 1741 that she was expected daily in Turin.11


On 22 August 1722 Buckworth was expected soon to go to the Continent, but nothing more is heard of this proposal.1  He arrived in Padua on 1 December 1728 with Edward and Robert Coke (the younger brothers of Lord Lovel).2 On 4 March 1729 Elizeus Burges reported from Venice that 'Sir John Buckworth, a younger brother of my Ld Chesterfield [Charles Stanhope] and two brothers of Lord Lovel's intend to set out from hence ye day after tomorrow for Bologna'.3 On 17 November the four were in Rome, having recently returned from a visit to Naples.4 In January 1730 they were still in Rome, delaying their departure to Venice until Stanhope had recovered from smallpox.5 Stosch wrote that the Pretender was in continual agitation as long as they were in Rome and the Jacobites followed them assiduously; they were particularly annoyed by Sir John, who had the prudence to avoid cafes and other public places. Buckworth and the elder Coke (Edward) finally left for Venice on 12 January.6 On 17 March Burges wrote that 'tho' ye Carnaval has been so long ended, we have several English here still. Lord Boyne & Mr. [Edward] Walpole, Sir John Buckworth and Mr Coke, Lord Menton [Vct. Hinton] and his Brother [Peregrine Poulett], who are Earl Pawlet's sons, chuse to continue here till ye Opera begins at Piacenza, rather than go to any other town in Italy'.7 Buckworth returned to Padua in May with Thomas Robinson and his wife, Lady Lechmere, and sister, Miss Robinson, signing himself on 30 May 'J. Buckworth Cittadino Fiorentino ed. Accademico Filarmonico'.8 In the course of his tour he had gathered a considerable collection of musical scores,9 and in the sale of his library in 1759 (Prestage, 2-7 May) there were many drawings, prints and books evidently acquired in Italy.

A Jacobite, Bulkeley's movements in Rome and the Campagna during the summer of 1726 were closely observed by Stosch.1 He was first reported in Rome on 11 May 1726; on 29 June he returned to Rome from Albano with the Pretender, Barlow (Hugh and/or Lewis), Pigot and Jones. The same party, with Bulkeley's tutor, Edward Holdsworth, left Rome towards the end of July to spend the summer at Genzano where, Stosch alleged, they were seen 'le long du jour dans une grotte, ou ils ont achettez deux grands Tonneaux de Vin'.3 By 17 August Stosch thought it advisable for Lord Bulkeley, Pigot and Jones to receive letters from London censuring their behaviour. On 31 August the three were on their way to Tivoli. On 28 September Bulkeley set off for Naples with Hugh Stafford, another Jacobite, in the wake of the Duke of Beaufort. He was back in Rome on 25 January 1727 for the Carnival, planning to join his friends Pigot and Jones who were leaving Rome on 27 January. On 22 February Stosch succinctly reported that 'Lord Buckley left for England. Declared for Jacobites. Un jeune homme à tout faire'. Bulkeley and Holdsworth arrived in Florence on 1 March, but they were ignored by the English community.2 They left on 15 March for Pisa, Lucca and Leghorn,3 and reached Padua on 27 May.4
The 7th Viscount Bulkeley first went to Italy in 1773 with George Grenville (later 1st Marquess of Buckingham), his contemporary at Oxford. Bulkeley was in Paris in June 17731 and arrived in Florence with Grenville on 2 January 1774.2 On 12 January they took their leave of Lady Mary Coke,3 and by 19 January they had reached Rome.4 On 7 March they arrived in Naples,5 where Grenville wrote that he was 'proud ... of the choice I have made of my friend, for since I have travelled with him I have never found in him one quality which I did not admire. We are on the happiest terms, and mean to continue our intimacy in England'.6 By 26 March Grenville thought that 'a few days more will be sufficient to show us everything that can be seen at Naples'. They had spent much of their time with Sir William and Lady Hamilton. By 16 April they were back in Rome, having made the journey from Naples in the remarkably short time of twenty-eight hours, in order to see St Peter's illuminated in honour of the visit of the Duke of Cumberland,6 with whom Grenville subsequently had several private conversations. According to Father Thorpe, Bulkeley and Grenville were upset not to be granted an audience with the Pope, having been taken by the Abbé Grant to an ante chamber where they waited two hours,7 but the Abbé maintained they did receive an audience. The Pope, he wrote on 18 May, had been 'amazingly polite to them and embraced me as if I was his brother. They are just gone for England and are much my friends. They are both most worthy and sensible young men.'8  While he was in Rome Bulkeley commissioned a monument (for St Bodfan, Aber) to his great friend the Rev. William Griffith, the rector of Aber. A portrait of Lord Bulkeley, painted at Rome in 1773, has been attributed to Romney (priv. coll.). Bulkeley evidently made other purchases (probably including a carved stone by Nathaniel Marchant9), since in May 1775 the Dowager Duchess of Beaufort told James Byres that she was hoping to receive some things 'through the means of Ld Bulkeley's case of Picatures'.10 Bulkeley and Grenville arrived in Venice on 29 May, having passed through Bologna on their way.11 Bulkeley then wrote 'I have terminated my Italian tour with every pleasure and every satisfaction which I could have expected from it'; he intended to leave Venice the next week and travel to England via Vienna,12 whence Grenville was writing to his uncle (Earl Temple) on 9 July. See also George Grenville. Lord Bulkeley returned to Italy with his wife in 1785, their tour being described in his letters to Sir Robert Keith.13 They reached Venice on 26 October via Vienna and Trieste, Bulkeley then recovering from a bilious attack (27 Oct.). By 24 November they had reached Florence, together with the Duchess of Ancaster and her daughter Lady Charlotte, Lord Northington and Mark Davis.14 On 6 December they were visiting the Uffizi.15 By the end of December they had gone to Rome,16 passing quickly on to Naples in January (31 Jan. 1786). There were some fifty or sixty British tourists there, and the Bulkeleys spent much time with Davis and Charles Grey, both of whom they had met in Vienna, and young Samuel Whitbread and his tutor William Coxe; there was talk of the rivalry between the Duchesses of Gloucester and Cumberland (31 Jan. 1786), and Bulkeley later wrote that such a fool as Cumberland 'ought to be shut up in Windsor Park' (8 Mar.).  Early in February they returned to Rome where Bulkeley frequented the Dowager Duchess of Ancaster who was 'at home every evening & the best English & French frequent her house'. He continued to see Davis, Grey, Whitbread and Coxe, but he was avoiding the 4th Earl of Bristol ('I know as little of him as I can help') and 'a numerous band of Birmingham English' (8 Mar.). They left Rome on the last day of March and arrived in Milan on 22 April, meeting his step-brother Robert Williams from Vienna (22 Apr.). They spent some time with the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester, making an excursion with them to the Borromean Islands; they planned to leave Milan on 6 May for Genoa, then go on through Turin, Geneva, and Paris, to reach England at the beginning of July (28 Apr.).
Buller travelled mainly in France, and spent only eleven days in Turin and the Piedmont region. He entered Italy on 6 June from Mont Cenis, where he noticed work had begun on the three-mile tunnel through the mountain (commissioned by the King of Sardinia). He reached Turin the next day and proceeded to visit the Royal palaces which he found 'remarkably comfortable - with Family Pictures of [the King's] Children & relations in most & every apparent sign of comfort'. He left Turin on 10 June returning to Mont Cenis via Susa, where he visited the church of S.Maria Maggiore (Buller Diary 1788-89; Devon RO, 2065 M/C1/1).
Mrs Buller arrived in Genoa from Turin on 28 September 1776 bearing a letter of introduction, and she left on 8 October 'on her intended journey'.1 This was probably Mrs Mary Coxe Buller, widowed after two years of marriage, who was in Paris in 17752 and was described by Fanny Burney in 1782 as 'a Greek scholar, a celebrated traveller in search of foreign customs and persons, and every way original in her knowledge and her enterprising way of life. And she has had the maternal heroism ... of being the guide of her young son in making the grand tour'.3 Her young son was John Francis (c.1771-1807, who took the additional names of Hippisley Coxe in 1796).


Bunbury had already travelled in France in 1767 before going up to Cambridge, and after only a year at St Catharine's Hall he set out for Italy.1 He was, presumably, the 'Bumberi' in Florence on 22 July 1769.2 He was drawn there by Patch ('Mr Bunberry'; priv. coll.) and has reasonably been identified as the central figure in Patch's Caricature Group (WSL; with false inscription on the verso: Henry Wm.Bunbury Romae 1770). A caricature of the sculptor Christopher Hewetson signed HB and dated 1769 (formerly in the Athenaeum, Bury St Edmunds) is attributed to Bunbury (but is conceivably by Henry Benbridge). Bunbury was readmitted to Cambridge on 1 February 1771.
Thomas Bunbury travelled with the 4th Viscount Torrington who was in Turin in April 1760.1 They had reached Rome by 5 July and had attended the festivities on the eve of the feast of St Peter with the Abbé Grant, John Mytton, the Hon. Thomas Robinson, a Mr Stewart [probably Charles Stuart] and a Mr Southwell; on 12 July the Abbé Grant conducted them to the Jesuit Museum, and on the following day they left for Florence.2 On 9 August Horace Mann told Horace Walpole that Bunbury would 'soon be convinced of the respect I owe to [your] introduction', adding on 13 September that 'Your recommande Mr Bunbury is a very knowing, agreeable young man, but too retired out of complaisance to his companion, Lord Torrington'.3 In Florence Torrington was interested in the disputed pictures which Lord Fordwich (later 3rd Earl Cowper) had bought from Thomas Jenkins and which Robert Strange thought copies, see Strange. Bunbury and Torrington appear in Patch's Punch Party dated 1760 (Dunham Massey) and also possibly in Patch's second Punch Party of 1761 (Chatsworth). Early in November Bunbury was in Venice, again meeting Thomas Robinson4 and Jacob Houblon.5 Torrington, who was seen in Venice in December,6 had declined an invitation from Sir James Gray, the British envoy, to winter in Naples,7 and in February 1761 he was apparently in Milan or Turin, languishing for love of a 'frozen nymph' whom he hoped to thaw by means of 'a shower of Sequins'.8 In the spring of 1761 he was one of the witnesses of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu's will9 and in August 1761 he was back in Florence.10 At the end of October he was preparing to leave11 and he arrived in Venice on 18 November with Lord Titchfield.12 Bunbury had returned to England by the autumn;13 he had probably been with Torrington throughout the year.
At Easter 1789 'Samuele Bunce Inglese Archo. - 24' was living in the Strada Felice at Rome with the American painter James Smith.1 In July he was making watercolours of Etruscan vases in the Uffizi Gallery in Florence.2 He was in Rome again by Christmas 1789 when, with Canova, he was the guest of the Flaxmans, Mrs Flaxman describing him as 'a young English architect with whom we shall travel towards our own happy land.'3 Bunce was in Naples early in 1790 when he delivered a letter from Flaxman to Sir William Hamilton.4 He was again listed in the Strada Felice with Smith at Easter 1790,1 and both appeared in the Rome List 1790 as living at the 'Trinità di Monte'. In March 1790 Bunce had witnessed the 4th Earl of Bristol's initial payment to Flaxman for the great marble group of The Fury of Athamas,5 which led the Flaxmans to stay on in Rome. Bunce was left to return home on his own. Flaxman gave him a letter for George Romney in London, dated 15 April 1790, which described his change of fortune and warmly recommended Bunce as his 'most esteemed friend in Rome, both for the excellence of his moral character, and his abilities in architecture'. Bunce returned through Milan to reach England late in June.6


Burdett left Oxford without taking a degree and embarked on his grand tour in the spring of 1789. He was in Paris in April 1789 and had been in Strasbourg and Switzerland before coming to Italy, apparently early in 1790. His radical opinions had been stimulated in Paris, and in Italy he was to be constantly critical of 'Popish' authority.1 In June 1790 he began a tour of Sicily with a Captain Fitzgerald. From Catania they climbed Mount Etna on their way to Palermo, but a lack of inns led them to accept the mean accomodation offered by 'grotesque looking' monks at a Capuchin convent. On 17 July Burdett came to Florence, where he was to take 'a very active part in cricket matches on the Prato'.2 He spent some time with the Gibbes family, with whom on 20 July he 'staid discussing the point of faith till past four, and could never be persuaded by Sir J. Mp [Macpherson]'s repeated messages to quit his argument and go to his dinner tho' a company was waiting for him'. On 20 September, with a Mr Finley, he accompanied the Gibbeses from Leghorn to Pisa, and three days later he 'took a last and very affectionate leave' of them.3 Burdett went on to Venice, arriving on 13 October and staying for a month4 before setting out home through Vienna and Berlin. He was back in England by July 1791.
The son of a rich banker, Burdon had travelled from London to Spa with Thomas Bowdler before April 1778. He had then toured in France and Switzerland on his own before coming to Italy.1 He was in Rome in April 1779 when he commissioned a view of the Bay of Baiae from Thomas Jones,2 suggesting he might already have been to Naples, and he also commissioned some drawings from John Brown, see Brown. He had meanwhile met up again with Bowdler (who had been in Naples from January to March), as well as John Patteson, John Soane, Henry Greswolde Lewis and John Stewart of Allanbank. Together they decided that, after spending Holy Week in Rome, they would make an expedition to Sicily.3  They sailed from Naples on 21 April, reaching Palermo on the 29th. Bowdler and Stewart left the party to make a more rapid tour, while the remainder followed Brydone's Tour and went on to Malta towards the end of May, see Patteson. According to Patteson, Burdon was 'quite an Enthusiast after Antiquities, if he sees 4 Rows of Stones the Ruins of a Roman building it gives him infinite pleasure [and] Soan the Architect cannot help siding with him.' Burdon and Soane became close friends. When the party returned to Naples early in July they stayed together at the Albergo Reale before setting off to spend a month in Rome. There Burdon sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 410; priv. coll.) and Thomas Jones twice met Burdon and Soane,4 once with the artists Pars, Tresham and Nathaniel Marchant (from whom Burdon acquired a carved gemstone).5 Early in August Burdon and Soane set out for Venice. They had reached Bologna by 16 August, when Burdon told John Strange (to whom he had a letter of introduction from Thomas Bowdler6) that, instead of travelling to Venice and then into France via Milan, the advent of war had altered their plans and they would now travel to Milan, Vicenza, Venice, and the Tyrol.7 They reached Milan via Parma, and by the end of August had arrived in Brescia, where they met up again with John Patteson, then on his way home. At Verona Burdon advanced Soane £40 to defray the cost of a project 'in measuring the Works of Michele San Michele'8 and in Vicenza Soane listed all the important buildings they saw together. They spent a day in Padua and reached Venice on 19 September.9 By 17 October Burdon was in Germany writing to thank John Strange for his hospitality in Venice.10 While Soane stayed on in Italy Burdon wrote to him from Newcastle in April 1780 concerning his particular interest in a drawing belonging to Strange.11 Often in their subsequent correspondence Burdon would hark back to their Italian travels together: 'Few expeditions have been begun, continued and ended, with more uniform and satisfactory results'.12 But there was also, apparently, a less satisfactory result, which led to him being described as 'a macaroni manqué grafted on the son of a Newcastle banker by two years running about in Italy'.13
With Lord Nassau Powlett, Lord Burford left Geneva on 7 October 1716 for Turin, where they were both to enter the Academy.1 His direct descent from Charles II excited Jacobite interest; 'I wish', wrote Lord Wharton to the Earl of Mar, 'some care could be taken to fix those two young noblemen who ... are gone to Turin, in the right interest, and perhaps some of your friends there may do it effectually'.1 On 22 January Burford and Powlett were in Padua,2 and they arrived in Venice the following day.3 They passed through Pesaro shortly before 5 June en route for Rome, and on 9 June David Nairne told John Paterson 'The two lords you mention, Nassau and Burford, are here, but I have heard nothing yet of their seeing the King'.4 On 10 June they arrived in Naples, at the same time as Sir Richard Corbet.5 On 15 September William Kent in Rome told Burrell Massingberd that 'my Ld Burford did me ye honour with other gentelmen to come upon ye Scaffold, to see me paint'.6 By 21 December Burford and Powlett had left Genoa for Turin.7

A genial cultivated man, with a love of the polite arts including music,1 Burges had two periods as British resident in Venice. His first appointment was suspiciously regarded by his predecessor, Alexander Cunningham, who thought there was some collusion between Burges and his friend Robert Brown, the wealthy English merchant at Venice. Although Burges received his instructions on 20 May 1719 and arrived in Venice on 17 October, Cunningham did not leave until 5 November 1719.2 Burges returned to England between his two spells of duty,3 and he appears to have travelled little in Italy; he was in Padua on 28 July 1720 with Neil Brown4 and is recorded in Turin on journeys between England and Venice in 1722 and 1734.5 Burges's diplomatic correspondence6 was much concerned with Jacobites, and latterly with the wars of the Polish Succession, of which he provided a melancholy account. 'This poor country [Italy], which is in no way concerned with the war', he wrote on 16 December 1735, 'has not failed to feel the bad effects of it. This Campaign, having several armies in it many months together, which lived, as they say, with great licence, taking many things without paying & giving what they pleased for the rest. The people in general complain of 'em all alike, but ye Spaniards have given greatest Offence'; the French were 'quarter'd in the Duchies of Milan, Piacenza, Padua, Guastala & Modena. The King of Sardinia's troops are all in his own Dominions in the state of Milan. The Germans are continually marching in small Bodies through the Divisions of the Republick; but they have no settled quarter in it. Their whole strength is in the Mantuan and Ferrarese, in the last of which places they live very well at the Pope's expence.'  But Burges was also able to comment on the growth of the grand tour. On 20 January 1730 he reported 'about thirty of His Majesty's Subjects here', but when he had first been in Venice 'we seldom saw above eight or ten in a winter, much is ye Humour of Traveling increased since that time: and as most of ye Young Gentlemen that come abroad have money enough, they spend it freely every where which makes 'em well received, and may be more for ye honour of our Country perhaps, than it is for her interest'. On 1 June 1731 he commented that the Ascension festivities had attracted more visitors 'than ever it was known to do and among others about 20 of His Majesty's subjects'.  Burges knew Owen Swiney and was the friend of Joseph Smith,1 the celebrated English patrons of Venetian painters, and he may himself have owned a group of works by the young Canaletto, in one of which (priv. coll., Milan) he was said to appear.7 Like Joseph Smith, Burges had a country villa on the Venetian mainland,1 and he appears to have been a friendly presence in Venice, though not without weaknesses. In 1721 the Duchess of Richmond had warned her son Lord March (later 2nd Duke of Richmond) not to 'keepe Mr Burges company too much, for I hear he is a violent drinker which is that has killed all our English youths',8 and later in 1734 Richard Pococke described Burges as 'a most facetious merry old Gentleman but a little prophane ... much troubled with Gout.'9 Between June and October 1733 Martin Folkes spent some of his time in Venice gossiping and drinking in the Piazza S.Marco with Burges.10 He suffered increasingly from gout, and was granted a leave of absence in the summer of 1734 when he made a painful journey back to England. He had returned to Venice and resumed his duties by 28 October 1735.11 On 31 December 1735 he wrote to the Earl of Essex 'I don't remember in what part of my letter I told you that I had taken to drinking again. I hope your Lordship has mistaken me; for it is so far from being the case, that I don't drink what is allowed me by my Physicians, nor even so much as they prescribe me. But Mr Villette [secretary at Turin] will not believe it ... As to the Ladies, I am persuaded they will do me no harm, as I use them. I have one in the House with me, who is an agreeable companion to me more than a Mistress. I commit no excesses to hurt my Nerves: but she often prevents my going abroad, and keeps me out of company, where I might be tempted to break my resolution and play the Fool, as I used to do. Your Lordship saies, with great reason, that women are bad for the nerves; but wine hurts them as much & gives the Gout too. It is well I have got the better of the most mischievous of those two vices, the other will leave me of itself.'12 But Burges died soon after; having suffered 'violent apoplectick Convulsions, occasioned by the Gout in his Stomack',13 he died in Venice on 14 November 1736 and was buried in the Protestant cemetery. A caricature of Burges-'Mister Collonel', a tall thin man with a craggy face-attributed to Anton Maria Zanetti the Elder is in the Fondazione Cini.
On leaving Oxford, Burges had travelled in France in the summer of 1771. Two years later he set out for Italy accompanied by his kinsman, the Rev. William Somerville, 'a very worthy man, a good clergyman, and an excellent farmer'.1 By the time they reached Italy their experiences of swindlers and unsavoury travelling companions had led them to carry knives. They reached Rome by 4 October 1773, in time to witness the celebrations in honour of St Francis, and with the help of Thomas Jenkins they procured a place in the Gallery at Castel Gandolfo from which to watch the fireworks. They were invited into the inner apartment by the Pope himself, and while waiting for the fireworks to begin they had seen 'il Pretendente Carolo Stuardo' in a magnificent cavalcade; Burges thought him 'fat and bloated', bearing 'the marks of habitual inebriety'. George Burges, his father, had captured the standard of Prince Charles's bodyguard at Culloden, but young Burges now pulled off his hat and bowed to the Young Pretender, who 'looked thoughtful and melancholy, but when he saw that I was an Englishman his countenance brightened up'. By 1 November they had reached Naples, where they beheld two 'painful and hideous spectacles'. Burges fainted in the noxious air of the catacombs with the decayed bodies of the 17th-century plague victims, and on the Festa dei Morti (All Souls Day, 1 November), they witnessed the annual display of corpses buried in the past year, while the magnificently dressed relatives of the deceased received their guests. 'It is impossible', wrote Burges, 'to conceive anything more horrid or disgusting in every stage of putrefaction, from the first livid swelling to the absolute skeleton decked out like persons going to a ball'. By 18 November they were back in Rome at the Palace of Monte Cavallo for a private audience with the Pope, contrived by Thomas Jenkins. Burges believed that it was his commendation of the antiquarian Orazio Labruzzi (who had guided him round Rome) that facilitated Labruzzi's later appointment as keeper in the Vatican museums. Burges sat to Pietro Labruzzi in October 1773 (dated Rome 1774; sold Sotheby's 6 Dec. 1972).2 On 22 November Burges and Somerville were on their way back to Florence, and early in 1774 they were back in England. Burges later reflected that the experience of his grand tour had made him 'extremely acceptable to all my old friends', and, he continued, he resolved to 'place myself on a footing in life which the education my father had given me, and the polish I had just obtained on the Continent, enabled me to support. I had, indeed, considerable advantages; such as being an excellent Latin and Greek scholar; talking French and Italian perfectly; dancing, riding, and fencing well; playing on the harpsicord, guitar and violoncello. These I considered as my fortune, and with these I determined to work my way'. His subsequent political career demonstrated the effectiveness of his determination.

In 1751 Burgoyne had sold his commission and taken his wife Lady Charlotte to France to avoid their creditors. Her father, Lord Derby, had always disapproved of their marriage. In 1755 they left France for Italy, accompanied by the Comte de Stainville, who had been appointed to the French Embassy in Rome1 and, presumably, by the artist Hubert Robert, who is known to have accompanied de Stainville.2 Robert Adam met them on their journey at Aix on 21 December 1754, and he noted their arrival in Florence for the last week of the Carnival in February 1755. Lady Charlotte, 'who didn't like foreigners', frequently partnered Adam at the Carnival Balls.3 In May she visited Adam in the Casa Guarnieri in Rome and inspected his wardrobe; 'she had no objection to anything but my red suit which colour she could not put up with ... but upon my assuring her ladyship I would soon be master of the prettiest suit of silk cloth Rome could afford she was quite satisfied'.4 Burgoyne sat to Allan Ramsay in Rome, the half-length portrait set against the Colosseum being dated 1756 (priv. coll.). Late in 1755 the worsening political relationship between England and France persuaded the Burgoynes to return to England. He was gazetted Captain in 1756, and became reconciled with his father-in-law.5 In 1763 Lady Charlotte wrote to the 2nd Viscount Palmerston in Rome: 'I shall be glad to hear how you like the Italian society, though I think, in general, it is very agreeable to most men. To me it was detestable. The turn of all women in that country is gallantry, and if one is so unfashionable as to have some notions of honour and virtue one has but a bad chance of passing one's time the least agreeably. I have no idea how anybody can live in Italy that does not give themselves wholly to passion'.6

For all his Italianate accomplishments, Lord Burlington made only two brief visits to Italy as a young man.1 On his first tour he left England in May 1714, immediately after the end of the Spanish Wars. His account book (at Chatsworth) reveals a large retinue which included the Huguenot priest Henry Isaac Gervais (a Vicar Choral from Lismore), and the artist Lewis Goupy. He arrived in Rome on 30 September. Burlington was only six months in Italy and of these nearly three were spent confined to his room in Rome. He was visited by 'ye Pope's doctor' on 12 October, and on 24 November Kent wrote that 'my Ld. Burlington is here but none has seen him yet but a Prussian & they say has been sicke ever since he came'.2 Burlington left his room on 27 December, 'the first day of My Lds going abroad since ye 3rd October last'. By the time he left Rome on 5 February he had bought twelve paintings, including works by Pasqualini, Pietro da Cortona, Viviani and Carlo Maratti; he had also paid 1,500 crowns and presented a set of marble columns to the convent of S.Maria della Vittoria to secure the Madonna della Rosa by Domenichino. He commissioned a large history picture from Giuseppe Chiari (which Lord Harrold saw in Chiari's studio in Rome in February 1716),3 a set of bronze Seasons from Massimiliano Soldani (now in the collection of H.M. The Queen), and he bought porphyry vases, a marble table and a diamond ring. His retinue grew to include a doctor, Alexander Sandilands, and three musicians, the violinists Pietro and Prospero Castrucci, and the 'cellist and composer Filippo Amadei, who returned to England with him; subsequently the sculptor G.B. Guelfi joined him in England. Burlington's return journey included three days in Florence; he was in Padua on 24 February,4 and went straight on to spend eight days in Venice, where he bought '12 pictures in miniature' from Rosalba Carriera (5 March). On 8 March consul Broughton reported that 'last Tuesday my Lord Burlington sett out hence for France and home'.5 He passed through the Veneto with its Palladian architecture in some haste, with only a few hours in Vicenza.  Burlington's second visit in 1719 was even shorter, just two months, but it was of greater practical consequence. He now set out specifically to study Palladio's architecture in the Veneto. In Genoa, probably early in October, he met William Kent, who later said Burlington was 'going to Vicenza & Venice to get Archetects to draw all ye fine buildings of Palladio'; Burlington had taken him to see 'two fine palaces of Vitruvio ... which he has order'd to be drawn'.6 His exact itinerary is not clear, but he certainly spent the last two weeks of October in Venice, departing on 1 November. The weather was against him, and on 6 November he wrote to Andrew Fountaine from Turin that he had been 'in a constant hurry' and had been forced 'to make my stay in Vicenza much shorter than I intended for the waters were so out that there was no possibility of seeing any of the villas at any distance from the town ... here has been such violent rains that the road from Venice to [Turin] looks like a sea, I left a great many passengers on the road and I was the only one that ventured to come on'.7 The same letter also revealed that he had acquired 'some tables at Genoa and some drawings by Palladio at Venice'. On 3 November (the day Dr James Hay [d. 1746] wrote enviously from Venice of Burlington, 'I wish we could afford to travel after his maner, but without his train'),8 Burlington was in Vicenza buying a copy of Palladio's Quattro Libri (Chatsworth) and he succeeded in purchasing some papers relating to Palladio's life and some of his designs from the owner of the Villa Maser (near Asolo). On his return journey he met up with Kent in Paris and they returned home together; Burlington was reported in London on 24 November.9 In the course of this second visit Burlington appears to have met the composer Giovanni Bononcini (who came to London the following year and was ultimately to divide the new Royal Academy of Music in London).  Burlington's collections descended through his daughter to the Dukes of Devonshire.
Recommended by the British minister in Lisbon, Burn came from Portugal and Spain to Turin in December 1779; he spent four days in the company of Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) before setting out for Naples on the 28th (Pembroke Papers, 1:364-6).
Burnaby was made chaplain to the British factory at Leghorn in 1762, in succession to Everard Hutcheson. In 1764 he also acted as chargé d'affaires during the absence of the consul, Sir John Dick (DNB). In May 1766 he delivered a set of sermons at Leghorn subsequently published in 1777 as Six Occasional Sermons: Of Moral Advantages to be derived from travelling in Italy. They exhorted the traveller to excel in virtue, emulating the 'great and illustrious characters' of antiquity, although Burnaby questioned whether 'the name of a Roman, while Rome was in prosperity, was more honoured and revered, than is that of a Briton at this time'. In August 1766 he visited Corsica with Frederick Augustus Hervey (later 4th Earl of Bristol); they left Leghorn on 3 August and stayed at least eight days, meeting the revolutionary leader General Pasquale de Paoli. In 1804 Burnaby published his Journal of a Tour to Corsica in the Year 1766. Burnaby remained at Leghorn until at least 1767 (when his father died); he was appointed Vicar of Greenwich in 1769, but his successor at Leghorn, John Byron, did not arrive until 1770.


Dr Burney travelled to Italy to collect material for his General History of Music [1776-89].1 Of all the writers on Italy Burney found it 'somewhat extraordinary that none have hitherto confined their views and researches to the rise and progress, or present state of music in that part of the world, where it has been cultivated with such success' (1). Accordingly he spent four busy months in Italy, talking with musicians and musicologists,2 consulting libraries, and adding to his collection of material. He found that there was more music in Italy than in England. At Venice, for example, during the Carnival there were seven opera houses open at once, 'three serious, and four comic, besides four play-houses, and these were all crowded every night' (151). But concert audiences were noisy and inattentive, largely because music was 'cheap and common, whereas in England it is a costly exotic, and more highly prized' (68).  At Turin he listened to a symphony in the Royal Chapel, heard the great violinist Pugnani and the brothers Belsozzi on the oboe and bassoon. At the opera house in Milan he found every box was furnished with 'a complete room, with a fireplace in it, and all conveniences for refreshments and cards'; on each side of the house there was a pharo table where people played during the opera. At Brescia he heard a wonderful young castrato, and he was to try in vain to discover where these painful operations were performed (312). In Padua he visited the house where the famous composer Tartini had died five months previously (seeing 'everything which could afford the least intelligence concerning his life and character, with the zeal of a Pilgrim at Mecca'; 126). At Venice he was moved to tears by girls singing in one of the Conservatories, who were 'absolute nightingales', and at the Mendicanti a special two-hour programme was performed for Burney alone. He was delighted with the street and canal music, but surprised to discover there were no music shops and that the art of engraving music had entirely disappeared. He met the composers Galuppi (whose genius, 'like that of Titian, became more animated with age'; 174) and Sacchini (who told Burney that he had written fifty operas). Burney reflected that Venice had 'few amusements but what the theatres afford; walking, riding, and all field-sports, are by the situation of their city denied them. This, in some degree, accounts for music being so much, and in so costly a manner, cultivated by them' (194-5). At Bologna, besides the fourteen-year-old Mozart, and the music historian G.B. Martini, he met the famous soprano Farinelli (then sixty-five), whose large room was furnished with pictures of great personages, chiefly sovereign princes who had been his patrons (222). In Florence he met Mozart's friend, the young English prodigy Thomas Linley. Before proceeding to Rome he sent home all the books he had bought in Bologna and Florence, in order to avoid any difficulties with the Inquisition. He spent three busy weeks in Rome, meeting many compatriots, of whom the Duke of Dorset and William Beckford of Somerley proved most helpful. Musical parties were arranged in his honour, the libraries of Cardinals were opened for him, and Charles Wiseman helped him to find and buy old music (385). Piranesi gave him copies of his works and gave him several drawings (276). Rome, thought Burney, was 'the post of honour for composers, the Romans being the most fastidious judges of music in Italy' (395). In October he went on to Naples with Captain John Forbes. He studied ancient instruments as shown on Etruscan vases, antique sculpture and paintings, and he was constantly assisted by William Hamilton and his wife, both great lovers of music (330-5, 358). Mrs Hamilton had a Sicilian waiting-girl sing her national airs to the tambour de Basque and Hamilton's two pages performed on the violin and violoncello. Hamilton arranged special concerts and gave him a place in his box at the opera. Burney also attended the after-dinner musical entertainment given by Lord Fortrose with a full orchestra and the famous castrato vocalist Caffarelli (334, 364). It was from Naples that Burney told Garrick (17 Oct. 1770) that his 'reception and treatment among the men of learning and genius throughout my journey have been to the last degree flattering'. Burney visited the Conservatories in Naples, which were music schools for boys (as opposed to the Venetian orphanages for girls), but he was not impressed with their performances.  Returning briefly to Rome, Burney set off on 22 November for his journey home. He had not been an easy traveller. He complained of the 'dust, dirt, cobwebs, fleas, bugs, and all manner of filth' in the inns; he suffered from 'cramps, stitches and spasms' and from swarms of mosquitoes in Venice; he shuddered with horror at the sight of 'the bog and the sickly and putrid hue of the inhabitants' of the Pontine Marshes. The journey back from Rome was made in the cold, the Arno had flooded between Florence and Pisa, and there was a dangerous (and bad-tempered) passage from Sarzana to Genoa by mule. In 1771 Burney published a separate account of his journey, containing only that which was directly related to music: The Present State of Music in France and Italy, or the Journal of a tour through those Countries, undertaken to Collect Materials for a General History of Music (Burney, Tour).
Burrows was apparently a merchant at Leghorn where he was anxious to attain consular rank. On 22 September 1700 he wrote from Leghorn seeking to succeed Sir Lambert Blackwell in that office1 (perhaps anticipating Blackwell's impending leave of absence, from 18 January 1701 to 4 April 1702).2 Thomas Dod, Sir Lambert's secretary, was officially chargé d'affaires in Florence for 1701-2,2 but the name of Burrows appeared as consul on a petition of 1701 drawn up by the merchants of Leghorn,3 and the Duke of Shrewsbury chose to stay with him on his arrival at Leghorn on 27 September 1701.4 In January 1702 Dod sent a petition to London bearing twenty-two names in support of Burrow's bid for the consulship,5 but Burrows, visiting Shrewsbury in Rome, 'owned himself ruined, and darkly complained of Sir Lam[bert] Blackwell'.6 Sir Lambert retained the consulate until 17057 when Christopher Crowe succeeded. In June 1716, both Burrows and Crowe, in an unsavoury campaign, promoted their brothers for the position of chaplain to the British Factory. At the same time Burrows again campaigned for the position of consul, this time against John Fuller, and ironically with the backing of Lambert Blackwell.8 He was unsuccessful on both counts.

Mr and Mrs Burt were in Naples between 1 December 1792 and 24 March 1793.1 On 27 March 1794 'Mr Birt whose Brother (the Minister of Twickenham) had married a Daughter of Mr Gascoyne' was in Leghorn.2 He was probably the 'Mons.r Burt Inglese' travelling with his wife from Padua who arrived in Venice on 21 April.3
Mr Burton, 'brother to Lord Conyngham', was in Milan on 20 April 1794;1 he was probably also the Mr Burton at Pisa in January 1795.2
Burton and his friend or tutor, Alexander Scott, met Lord Charlemont in Turin in October 1748 and they accompanied him on his expedition to the Levant in 1749, see Charlemont. Burton has been described as playing Sancho Panza to Charlemont's Quixote (W.B. Stanford and E.J. Finopoulos eds., Travels of Lord Charlemont in Greece and Turkey 1749, [1984], 2).
John Burton was playing the harpsichord at concerts in Rome on 20 December 1775 and in March 1776.1 In 1782 Burton accompanied William Beckford of Fonthill to Italy. He died in Naples early in September, 'during the Delirium of a Fever, and execrating in a most shocking manner, the Person who was incidentally instrumental, as he thought, in bringing him into this deplorable Situation'.2
Two years after the tragic death of his first wife (she was killed by the fall of a scaffold at the coronation of George I), Samuel Burton travelled to Italy with his cousin, the painter and architect Francis Bindon. They were in Padua on 28 October (Brown 1514-15).
In Rome Burton's portrait was drawn in pastel by Mengs (priv. coll.) and painted by Nathaniel Dance.1 He was also conceivably the Burton drawn by Patch in Florence. In 1810, fourteen years after Burton's death, his library was sold; apart from works by Mengs, Algarotti, Winckelmann, Vitruvius and Palladio, there were many Piranesi prints described as 'the very finest impressions expressly pulled for the late Proprietor, who was a benefactor of Piranesi'.
Bury was in Genoa between 3 and 15 April 1788,1 and the following year, while still in Italy, he commissioned James Byres to produce designs for the rebuilding of Redwood, his house in Co. Offaly2 (five of these drawings were on the Dublin art market in 1988).
Mrs Bury travelled to Italy for her health, attended by her sister, Diana Molyneux (who 'denies herself every pleasure in life to sit constantly by her sister's side and declares she will never leave'), and her physician, Dr Grierson. Robert Adam met them in Naples in 1755 and subsequently in Rome; in April 1757 he recorded their departure for Naples 'to try the sea-bathing'. At first Adam 'couldn't endure' Miss Molyneux, whom he found 'proud and affected and immensely coquettish', but later, after she had admired some of his drawings, she became both 'agreeable' and 'accomplished', 'a lady with £900 a year portion, who had refused the best noblesse in England to attend a sick sister' (Fleming, Adam, 224-6, 230, 361n).

Although Bute did not make the grand tour in his youth, he was closely informed of opportunities for collecting in Italy long before his own departure for the Continent, largely for reasons of health, in 1768. As the former favourite of King George III and Prime Minister, his movements were watched with close attention. Although by travelling as the Chevalier Stuart, with his son Charles and a small establishment, Bute sought to avoid notice, he availed himself of the services of many key figures, including Sir James Wright, Robert Richie and later John Strange in Venice, the Abbé Grant and James Byres in Rome, William Hamilton in Naples, Horace Mann in Florence and John Symonds. The extant correspondence illuminates Bute's connection with these men, but it does not offer comprehensive documentation of the collections Bute built up when in Italy.1 On 17 October 1768 Bute wrote to Wright asking him to find a house in Venice. While there he evidently placed commissions with the Resident and also conceived the idea of forming a collection of views of the buildings he admired in Italy, employing Visentini and a number of younger draughtsmen, including F. Bocher and Luigi Trezza (for views of Verona). Bute's intention to winter in Rome was known to Father Thorpe by 22 November and he arrived on the 28th.2 A detailed account of his life there is given by Grant in a letter to Hamilton (13 Jan. 1769).3 Bute saw the sights with Symonds, and also employed Byres, who would execute his later Roman commissions. Among artists patronised in a minor way were Hugh Dean, James Forrester and, perhaps, Anne Forbes. Hamilton, an old acquaintance, offered his services in Naples, where, however, Symonds was Bute's companion as sightseer. The Earl's party dined twice with the Hamiltons and he climbed Vesuvius. Orders were placed through Hamilton with his protégé Fabris and for boxes and fans. Plans to visit Sicily were shelved, and Bute returned to Rome, spraining his ankle en route. During his brief visit to Florence, he bought a supposed self-portrait of Poussin from Mann, as well as scagliola and two alabaster vases. He travelled northwards by way of Genoa and Turin to Venice, where a number of pictures, including two by Veronese and, apparently, Tiepolo's Finding of Moses (SNG), were bought. Bute's journal of his route north from Venice records his admiration of Giorgione's Castelfranco altarpiece. Bute's health collapsed after he reached London and he was persuaded to return to a 'warm climate'. He left Dover on 5 November and went directly to Valdagno, and thence to Venice for the late winter. In May he was back at Valdagno and later in the summer he moved to Mogliano before returning to Venice where he remained from October 1770 until April 1771. Letters to Sir James Wright, who was then in London, illuminate Bute's mood at the time and he also corresponded with Mann, Hamilton and Byres. In Venice Pietro Edwards and Robert Richie assisted Bute, who formed a close friendship with John Strange after the latter's arrival. Much of Bute's time was devoted to natural history. He built up a notable library of Italian books, securing that of one branch of the Soranzo family en bloc, and undertook a number of publishing ventures. It may also be presumed that he secured the majority of the Venetian cinquecento canvases later recorded at Luton Park.  Bute considered returning to Venice later in the 1770s. He corresponded regularly with Strange, and continued to communicate with Hamilton and Byres about individual commissions. Both helped the Earl to secure architectural drawings, while Strange supplied numerous publications and specimens, loosely overseeing the work of the Earl's botanical artist, Baldassare Cattrani. In 1786 Byres supervised the erection of a monument to the Abbé Grant in the Scots College, Rome, at Bute's expense (231 crowns).
Alban Butler travelled in Italy as tutor to James and Thomas Talbot (younger brothers of George, 14th Earl of Shrewsbury), who had both been studying at Douai. Both became Catholic priests and their tour was appropriately conducted. Butler described it in his Travels through France and Italy, and part of the Austrian, & Dutch Netherlands, during the years 1745 and 1746 [1803], a work of pedagogy. While Butler believed that Italy was 'the chief school of improvement for travellers', his charges were evidently not allowed to enjoy the Medici Venus, whose 'softness and grace of life' was 'too dangerous an object for any one to look upon'. Nor apparently were they allowed to visit the theatre, 'the school of the passions and of sin'. Butler, not surprisingly, considered the Italians lacked 'true interior devotion', despite the magnificence of their churches.  In the Writings of Alban Butler (ed. Charles Butler [1800]:10) it was stated, apparently in error, that George, the elder brother, was also of the party, see George, Lord Shrewsbury.
Butler appears to have travelled with the 10th Earl of Pembroke as far as Vienna.1 On 7 August 1752 James Tyrrell wrote that 'Lord Lanesborough's son' was daily expected in Florence.2 He was presumably the Mr Butler who was civil to James Russel in Rome early in 1753.3 On 10 March 1753 'Brindley Butler' was passing through Capua with Robert Rochfort [his future father-in-law?] on his way to or from Naples.4 He was possibly the Butler with Lord Bellew in Turin in May 1754, see John, 4th Baron Bellew. His daughter Sophia married in 1787 the marchese Marescotti and lived in Italy.

A close friend of Ozias Humphry, James Butler came to Italy with his son seeking Italian singers and libretti for the Opera in London. On 6 September 1774 he wrote to Humphry from on board the Devonshire in the Bay of Salerno, saying they were then undergoing quarantine. On 17 September, from the same address, Butler wrote to Charles Wiseman asking him to engage singers at Bologna for London.1 On 19 October 1774 the banker Barazzi in Rome was promising to pay Butler £200 in Bologna (HU/2/17). An undated letter from Humphry to William Hamilton in Naples reported Butler's death in Rome and asked Hamilton to tell Butler's son (HU/2/21).


A Jacobite, Butler came to Italy as governor to Hugh Stafford, and his movements in Italy were closely watched by Stosch.1 By 8 June 1726 Butler had attended a dinner in Rome given by Dr James Hay, the Pretender's surgeon, with a Mr Hamilton and one of the Barlow brothers (Hugh or Lewis) with their governor Thomson. By the same date he had also visited O'Connor, the Irish governor of the garrison at Civitavecchia, with the 3rd Duke of Beaufort. On 28 September 'Strafford', almost certinly Hugh Stafford, left Rome with the 5th Viscount Bulkeley to follow the Duke of Beaufort to Naples.2  Hugh Stafford again went from Rome to Naples in March 1727, and Butler went to fetch him; they were 'constantly quarreling' and were back in Rome on 17 May, staying near the Piazza di Spagna3 and intending soon to leave for Montpellier. By the second week of June they had reached Padua on their journey north.4

On the breaking of his voice [Thomas Butler] was sent to Italy to study composition under Piccinni' and spent three years in Florence (Grove). Thomas Jones met Butler and Piccinni at Bolsena on 25 November 1776 on their journey from Rome to Paris (Jones Memoirs, 52).
Butler attended a dinner given by James Byres in Rome in December 1782.1 In May 1788, soon after he had left Rome for Ireland, Father Thorpe wrote that Butler 'was a Jesuit of the Mexican Prov. at the Havannah; he is gone from hence a few days ago for Ireland which he left five & fifty years since, & where now he proposes to put in his claim as next male heir of the Cahier family. He formerly quitted his brethren under their sufferings in Corsica & provided himself with a Brief of Secularization some proposed was made for his going to England but our Jesuits there were timely warned of it'.2

<1741> Button - painter came lately from Italy having made his studies there learnt of Sebastian Concha -and others. Studyd anatomy - and antient Statues bas relievos in company with Mr Hussy' [Giles Hussey] (Vertue 3:103).

Byde had been acting as a banker when he went bankrupt in 1779 and caused 'the utmost confusion and distress' in Hertfordshire.1 He lived subsequently in Naples where Peter Cowling observed him on 19 September 1786: 'an Elderly Gentleman-like looking Man, drest after the English fashn & a true English face about him' with 'the Ease of a Gentleman & a well bred Man under Mean Apparel'. On 29 September Cowling visited Byde at his lodgings in the palace of Prince Carimanico.2 Byde died at Naples on 26 May 1789, 'reduced to the most abject condition, after all the visionary speculations in his own country, and the unjustified means he pursued to realize them'.3
Admiral Byng had served in the Mediterranean in 1693-5 and 1706-7 before taking command of the Mediterranean fleet in 1709 and again in 1718-20, when he was sent to obstruct Spanish designs on Naples and Sicily, and to act as plenipotentiary to the Italian States.  He had arrived in the Bay of Naples on 1 August 17181 and stayed in Naples at the Duke de Matalone's palace. An opera was performed in his honour and he visited the Grotto del Cane and the Solfo Terra on 4 August. On the 6th he sailed to Messina, prior to defeating the Spanish fleet off Cape Passero. He returned to Naples on 2 November, vested with plenipotentiary powers (which his son Pattee had brought back from England in October). On 13 May 1719, one of the Feast days of St Januarius, he attended the liquefaction of the Saint's blood, but his presence, it was alleged, delayed the miracle. On 29 August, with his son Pattee (who was acting as his interpreter) he left for Genoa, where he gave entertainments with the British consul, George Henshawe;2 they viewed the principal Palaces and were joined by Robert Byng, the fourth of the Admiral's sons, from Turin (where he had been attending the Academy). The Admiral was back in Naples in February and June 1720, but was then based principally in Sicily, where he stayed latterly in the Castro Reale, near Palermo. He finally left Naples with his sons Pattee and Robert on 17 July 1720, visiting Leghorn on 13 August on his way home. See Pattee Byng. It appears that Byng patronised the painter Paolo de Matteis in Naples, and a set of four Italian panoramas of Naples, attributed to dal Po, remains at Wrotham.2
George Byng sailed from England on 21 March 1719 to join his father and older brother in Naples. He was then a cornet in the Blues 'in the eighteenth year of his age'. On 16 November he was lying 'ill of his wound' at Pozzuoli and on 8 May 1720 he was sent to Paris and England (J.L. Cranmer-Byng ed., Pattee Byng's Jnl.1718-20, 67, 209, 271).
John Byng reached Italy via Switzerland, having met Voltaire at Ferney at the beginning of October 1763.1 James Martin met him, with a Danish gentleman, Mr Schreiber, in Genoa, Leghorn, Florence, Siena, Rome and Naples; at Siena they spent an evening with Lord Palmerston and at Naples, on 8 January 1764, they visited Angelica Kauffman,2 to whom Byng sat for one of her earliest portraits of an English sitter (priv. coll.).3 Byng passed through Capua on his way back from Naples on 12 February 1764.4 He died at Bologna on 24 May 1764.5
In 1710 Pattee Byng, aged twelve, accompanied his younger brother Matthew (1700-14) to Italy. They dined with the British envoy Henry Newton in Florence on 28 December 1710, and were in Rome on 20 May 1711.1 By the end of June they were in Venice, intending to set out for Frankfurt and Holland the next week.2 Their subsequent movements are unclear, but Matthew died in Florence in December 1714, and was buried at Leghorn. Pattee was probably with him when he died, since he is recorded in Naples on 5 March 1715, having travelled from Rome with a Mr Plummer [Walter Plummer?] and several other Englishmen.3 He had spent a winter and spring in Rome in 1715, as he recorded in his Journal (which goes on to describe his subsequent Italian experiences).4 In 1718-20 Pattee was in Italy with his father, Admiral Sir George Byng, for whom he acted as interpreter and special diplomatic emissary, making use of his fluent Italian and his acquaintance with the best families of Rome and Naples. On 27 August 1718 he was sent back to England bearing news of his father's defeat of the Spanish at Cape Passero; leaving Naples on 27 August, he crossed Mont Cenis on 3 September. He returned from London immediately, crossing Mont Cenis on 1 October and visiting the Grand Duke of Tuscany on 5 October. He attended the opera in Florence, before proceeding rapidly to Naples where he arrived on 9 October. On 5 February 1719 he left Naples to visit Rome (recording in his diary, 'I had been at Rome in the year 1711, and again in the year 1715 I passed the winter there, and part of the spring'). He witnessed the Carnival, 'the men appearing in Cavalacade, represent Heathen Gods, Indian Emperors, and other oriental or Moorish monarchs ... the women appear in open, triumphal Gilded Chariots, representing Venus, Juno, and the several Goddesses', and he was intrigued 'at the sudden transition, from rioting thus in all the wantoness of heart in the last days of the Carnival, to the solemn scenes of sanctity and superstitious worship the very next day, which is the first of Lent'. On 24 March he returned to Naples, where he shared an enthusiasm for antiquities with consul Fleetwood, but most of his time was spent in his father's service. In September 1719 he accompanied him to Genoa (where Pattee's ability as an interpreter attracted comment), and spent much time afloat round Sicily and Malta, before he was allowed to settle in Naples in November 1719 acting as his father's secretary. On 15 February 1720 his father sent him on a mission to Vienna, from which he returned on 30 April. On the return journey he visited the Laurentian Library in Florence on 22 April and four days later saw the Pretender and his Princess in the Villa Borghese gardens. In May he rejoined his father in Sicily, which he described as lawless-'the churches and mountains are sufficient sanctuary till time and opportunities bring them again into the society of mankind'. He finally left Naples with his father and his younger brother Robert on 17 July; they sailed to Leghorn (where they experienced quarantine difficulties) and then went overland, through Florence (where they attended the Grand Duke's seventy-eighth anniversary celebration), Bologna and Verona, to reach the mountains of the Tyrol on 19 August.

Isabella went with her parents to join her brother James in Rome, probably immediately after the death of her husband in 1775.1 In 1776-8 they were living in the Strada Paolina.2 She appears with them in two group portraits attributed to Smuglewicz (see James Byres). On 18 April 1779 Thomas Jones said that James Byres was to leave Rome the next day 'to escort his Father & Sister' for England,3 but he probably meant 'mother' rather than 'sister'. Isabella's portrait was painted by Batoni in Rome in 1781 (Clark/Bowron 429; Kenwood), indicating that she stayed on, or had returned to Rome.
The son of committed Jacobites and a Catholic, Byres spent over thirty years in Rome where he became familiar to all British travellers as an antiquary and guide. In 1780 Thomas Jones observed that Byres and Thomas Jenkins had 'for Years had the guidance of the Taste and Expenditures of our English Cavaliers, and from [their] hands all bounties were to flow'.1 But there was more to Byres than commercial flair; behind his rather dour Aberdonian manner lay a minor architectural talent, a serious interest in antiquity and a discriminating appreciation of British artists in Rome. He had come to Rome as a young student of painting, possibly in 1756, certainly by 1758. Robert Mylne wrote on 11 February 1758 that Byres was then coming to Rome2 and 'Boyers a Scotch lad studiant in painting' was listed in Rome on 6 May 1758.3 But there was also a 'Baer Ingl.' living in the Strada Felice in 1756 and 1757 ('Baev'[?]), who become 'Baes Inglese eretico Pittoe.-30' in 17584 (the disparity of age is of no consequence, but it is curious that Byres, if it were he, was called a Protestant). Byres later recounted how he had studied painting 'for five years' under Mengs,5 who left Rome in 1761, which would indicate his arrival in Rome in 1756. Mengs, recognising that Byres had turned relatively late to painting, thought he would do better 'to apply himself to miniature and enamel',6 but when Mengs left, Byres turned to architectural studies at which he displayed some competence. He won a third prize for architectural design at the Accademia di S.Luca in 1762. In 1768 he was elected an honorary Academician and in 1773 he was to choose the subject for the annual architecture prova.7 His portrait, attributed to Maron, remains at the Accademia. Of his executed Roman designs, there is a monument to Sir James Macdonald (1768) in Sleat church, Isle of Skye, and chimney pieces for Fyvie (1773) and Badminton (1775); a number of unexecuted designs also survive for distinguished patrons, including Sir Lawrence Dundas (1768), Sir Watkin Williams Wynn (1770) and Lord Arundell (1771); one of the last was for Charles William Bury (Lord Charleville) in 1789.8  Long before this, however, Byres had turned to the profession of antiquarian, an easy step from the study of Roman architecture. In June 1764, for example, James Martin had examined with Byres the Baths of Caracalla, and he then noticed Byres 'with the assistance of two or three Architects' making measured drawings of them.9 The most serious of his antiquarian projects took place in 1766 in the company of (John or Roger) Wilbraham. They explored the subterranean Etruscan tombs of Tarquinia (Corneto), which were then little known (although Thomas Jenkins in 1761 and Piranesi in 1765 had visited them). On 11 March they left Rome and passing through Paestum went on through the unfamiliar and dangerous country of Calabria to Reggio, whence they crossed the Straits of Messina to Sicily. Byres kept an illustrated journal of the Sicilian tour which ends abruptly on 23 May.10 They were back in Rome by 16 July and soon after, it appears, Byres conceived the idea of writing a History of the Etrurians (some drafts for which survive amongst his descendants' papers).11 In 1767 he went to London to find subscribers, but the project proved too ambitious. Subscribers were asking in 1792 where their money had gone and only the plates, drawn by Smuglewicz and etched by Christopher Norton, were eventually published in 1842. Byres returned to Sicily on at least one other occasion, with Lord Richard Cavendish in April 1781.  His reputation was to be founded on his more popular skill as an antiquarian guide or cicerone in Rome. Before Byres, Mark Parker (until 1749) and James Russel (until 1763) had been established in that role, and now Byres successfully disputed the succession with Colin Morison. The latter was 'esteemed the best medallist and classic scholar - Byres the most agreeable and communicative'; their courses cost twenty sequins ('and thirty if two companions'), and the tourist was recommended to prepare the relevant chapter of Venuti's Descrizione topografica delle Antichità di Roma [1763] the night before.12 A tour could last six weeks,13 but Edward Gibbon alleged that his tour with Byres in 1764 lasted eighteen (but he must have meant eight) and, although the 'Scottish antiquary' was a man 'of experience and taste', nevertheless 'the powers of attention were sometimes fatigued'.14 The thoroughness of Byres's preparation may also be deduced from his extensive (and forthright) annotations in his own copy of Titi's Nuovo Studio ... di Roma [1721] (with Quaritch 1990); Bernini's figures, 'monstrously charactered', annoyed him by failing to agree with a strictly classical canon.  Several descriptions of Byres's methods survive, from 176415 onwards. In 1778 Philip Yorke (later 3rd Earl of Hardwicke) observed that 'Mr Beyers has no regular system of showing Rome', but determined himself by the weather, 'antiquities and ruins when fine, statues and palaces when wet, and if it should be a clear day but unpleasantly windy we see pictures'.16 In 1781 Thomas Clarke was beginning to be 'rather sick' of Byres; 'if a Man wants to be au fait with every triglyph & modillion in Rome', he wrote, 'he is your man', though he later conceded that Byres was an 'intelligent man, tho' a very disagreeable one'.17 In 1783 Parkinson recorded Byres's examination of the Cloaca Maxima which led to a discursus upon 'a great deal of Colateral Matter', including the origins of Rome and the artistic links between Greeks and Etruscans.18 In 1784 the Rev. Thomas Brand, while he was 'very well satisfy'd with Byres', nevertheless thought him 'a sad peevish fellow & would quarrel with his own shadow'; he had tried to take notes, but 'but he went on at such a rate ... that it was impossible to keep up with him', although Brand did have the advantage of understanding 'the Ayberdeen Deealact'.19 There are more accounts of tours of 1785,20 by which time he appears to have become still more exacting. In 1787 Charles Long (later Lord Farnborough), having begun his course quite equably, ended saying he was 'not sorry to have done with a man who is one of the most irritable I ever met with'.21 In The World Fashionable Advertiser on 5 February 1787 it was announced that 'Byres, who used to show the Lions as Ciceroné to the English, is now ceasing to do so: - He has got ill, and what is worse, ill-tempered.' But in February 1790, aged fifty-five and just three months before his final departure from Rome, he was guiding James Clitherow and Mr Lascelles.  Although as a dealer in antiquities and paintings Byres seems not to have attained the grandeur of Thomas Jenkins, he practised the trade in the devious manner of the time. It made great demands on his time. Father Thorpe in 1770 found that Byres had 'so much & so various business, that he is seldom to be met with at the hours in which I have any liberty,'22 and Byres himself, writing to Lord Exeter in 1771, talked of winding up his 'Affairs here, to retire home as I find it will be impossible for me to support much longer the fatigues I am obliged to undergo as an Antiquary'.23 But instead of returning home, Byres took on assistants, his kinsmen Christopher Norton, who had arrived in Rome by 1762, and Patrick Moir, who joined him in 1785. When Allan and John Ramsay visited Byres in 1782 he showed them in his house 'very valuable things, particularly a very fine picture of Correggio (Venus arising out of the sea) and a very fine landscape of Claude Lorrain'.24 Among his most significant purchases were Poussin's Assumption (Washington), bought from Count Soderini and sold to Lord Exeter in 1764,25 the Portland Vase (British Museum) bought c.1780 from Donna Cordelia Barberini-Colonna and sold to William Hamilton, and Poussin's Seven Sacraments bought from the Boccapaduli family and sold to the Duke of Rutland in 1785. This involved the substitution of copies for the originals; 'I get them, one at a time, from the Marquess, as the copies are made and put up in their place', wrote Byres on 10 June; Reynolds told the Duke in 1786 that 'one of the articles ... between Beyers and the Marquis was that he should bring the strangers as usual to see the copies, and which he says he is obliged to do, and, I suppose, swear they are originals'.26 On 14 June 1786, when the transaction was complete, Byres advised the Duke 'that it should never be mentioned through whose hands he got them, for my name being mentioned might be attended with the worst consequences to me here, where we live under a despotic government who are more jealous than ever of fine things going out of Rome'.27 Byres is also known to have sold a chalcedony carved by Pichler as an antique gem.28 On several occasions between 1786 and 1788 Byres employed Vincenzo Pacetti to repair statues, and in November 1786 used him to arrange a room of antiquities (presumably a display cabinet).29 Byres was exporting works of art from Rome from at least 1769; a number of his consignments made between 1784 and 1790 are listed by Bertolotti, including '50 quadri moderni' in December 1788.30  Of contemporary artists Byres stayed understandably close to Batoni, one of whose executors he was to be in 1787,31 and he also promoted Anton Maron.32 He was particularly helpful to the Scots (Gavin Hamilton, David Allan and Alexander Nasmyth, for example) and his patronage carried much weight. On 31 July 1773 Thomas Banks wrote that Philip Wickstead 'has had most of the portraits to paint last season, owing to the efforts of Messrs Norton and Byres to carry every gentleman they could get hold of to see him'.33 Byres himself owned many works by these British artists, his 1790 inventory including the additional names of Solomon Delane, Jacob More, H.D. Hamilton, Hugh Dean, William Patoun and Colin Morison. The commercial aspect was indicated by Thomas Jones, who explained that such works were hung in 'Rooms of Audience for the inspection of Cavaliers who came'.1  From at least 1762 Byres was living in the parish of S.Lorenzo in Lucina, near the Piazza di Spagna ('seguita strada Vittoria verso Strada Paolina'), sharing rooms with Colin Morison until 1765. In 1776 his parents and Mrs Sandilands were staying near the Piazza di Spagna ('seguita Strada Paolina verso i Greci') and in 1778 James Byres's name appears with theirs at the same address, which was evidently his home for at least fifteen years (his name recurs there in the Parish registers in 1779-80, 1781, 1786-8, 1790, but the records are incomplete). The Byres inventory of 179034 describes a house of some splendour, laid out with some commercial flair. While the reception rooms had gilt furniture and marble-topped tables, surrounded with plaster busts, copies of old masters and the considerable number of works by British artists, Byres's private room was austere and contained a walnut prie-dieu.  Byres rarely left Rome, but he returned to Scotland on at least four occasions. In 1767 (as mentioned above) when he met the young painter Anne Forbes (whom he subsequently helped in Rome), in 1772-3 when he obtained three commissions for architectural work in Aberdeenshire;35 in 1779, when he travelled back with his parents who had been staying with him in Rome, and in 1787 when he attended his dying mother. Byres finally left Rome in 1790, to return to the family estates at Tonley. His departure was apparently determined by misfortunes at home (a brother having 'failed' in 1789 and another having died).36 He left his house in Rome to Patrick Moir. Byres was staying in Venice from 30 June to 3 July 1790, with Norton and Lord Clive, on his return journey.37 He offered to come out to Rome to help his nephew in 1793 and intended returning in the autumn of 1797, perhaps for a year.38 Many of his works of art had meanwhile remained in Rome, and even after Patrick Moir's death in 1817 there were still cases containing part of his collections in Leghorn.39 Apart from his portrait in the Accademia di S.Luca, there are at least four other Roman portraits of Byres. Two portrait groups of the Byres family by the Polish artist Franciszek Smuglewicz c.1776, show Byres with his parents, his sister and his associate Christopher Norton; one (Brinsley Ford coll.) includes a view of St Peter's, the other (SNPG), an interior with a portrait said to be of the Young Pretender (in 1790 Byres allegedly made a payment to the Maestro di Casa of Cardinal York, the Young Pretender's brother40). Byres also appears in two conversation pieces attributed to Wickstead painted at Rome c.1773 (versions at Springhill, Ulster, and Audley End; Ham House, and priv. coll.),41 and his portrait by H.D. Hamilton is at Aberdeen.
Patrick Byres travelled to Italy with his wife and daughter, both for his health and to stay with his son James, see Isabella Byres. He was heard in Rome extolling the superior merits of Scottish scenery, preferring Loch Lomond and the valley of Stirling to Lake Nemi and the Campagna. The family were painted twice in Rome by Smuglewicz (see James Byres) and Patrick also sat to John Rouby in Rome (R.B. Ford, Apollo, 99[1974]:455-6, and J. Moore A View of Society and Manners in Italy, [1781], 2:339-49).

Byron was appointed to replace Andrew Burnaby as chaplain to the English factory at Leghorn, but died two months after his arrival in 1770, aged 25. He was buried in the English cemetery,1 where Parkinson in 1784 saw 'poor young Byron's tomb' and transcribed the epitaph into his journal.2

Charles Sloane Cadogan described his extensive travel between 1783 and 1790 in a series of letters addressed to his brother, some extracts of which have been published (their author identified as either the 1st Earl Cadogan of the 2nd cr., or Charles Cadogan).1 He was twice in Italy, the first occasion during the winter of 1784-5, and he was presumably the Cadogan seen at Turin on 13 October 1784.2 He spent two weeks in Rome and went on to Naples, a 'town full of plays, masquerades, operas, pickpockets etc.' From Naples he sailed to Sicily, where he climbed Mount Etna. In the summer of 1785 he went to Constantinople, and for the next four years he was in eastern Europe. In 1789 he returned to Rome to attend 'a regular and most interesting course of antiquities'. He was in Paris in 1790.
Mrs Cadogan accompanied her remarkable daughter to Italy in the spring of 1786 and spent fifteen years in discreet attendance upon her in Naples, see Sir William Hamilton. In 1799 her daughter, then Lady Hamilton, wrote of her: 'You cannot think how she is loved and respected by all ... She as a good apartment in our house, allways lives with us, dines, etc. etc. onely when she does not like it, for example great dinners she herself refuses & as allways a freind to dine with her and La Signora Madre dell'Ambasciatrice is known all over Palermo the same as she was in Naples'.1 Lady Palmerston told her brother that Mrs Cadogan looked 'like a lady you have more often found useful than I could ever have done',2 and the 'little old Woman with a white bedgown and a black petticoat' was once mistaken for the Hamiltons' housekeeper, a function she occasionally undertook.3
Mrs Cagnoni was the English wife of Willem Bentinck's banker in Naples in 1727.1  An Italian, Joseph Cagnoni, was the Pretender's agent in Tuscany from c.1717; 'his family, & Son' had 'already retired to dwell at Naples' in 1720. Cagnoni's son had been recommended for a Jacobite knighthood in 1717,2 and Lady Grisell Baillie had met in Naples his daughter 'Mlle Louise Cagnony' and her sister.3
Marian Cailer, who died at Leghorn on 22 December 1806, was presumably of the same family (Leghorn Inscr., 48).

Joseph Caire applied to open a glass manufactory in Leghorn in 1788-9 which was operating by 1791-2. He was seeking to sink a well in September 1796. In September 1788 he had forbidden his son, Dudley Alther Caire, to marry one Francesca Giovacchini, and sent him away from Tuscany. John Baptist Caire and Peter Caire ran a shop in Leghorn in April-May 1791 (ASL G 1215).



By his own account when he had finished his studies Caldwell 'set out upon his travels, with a view to acquire such further knowledge as might best enable him to discharge his duty to his King and his country'.1 He spent nearly seven years abroad, 'at academies in France and Italy'. He became a friend of Montesquieu in Bordeaux, and in May 1746, intending to go to Italy, he met Lady Mary Wortley Montagu in Avignon. He was soon telling her that 'I'm off my intended schedule of going to Italy this autumn', but he was certainly in Italy in January 1747.2 His subsequent movements are not clear. Wishing to serve in the British army under the Duke of Cumberland, he was advised to acquire some military experience and accordingly he enlisted in the Austrian service. He served with some distinction in Italy under General Ulysses Browne and was employed by the King of Sardinia at Turin to negotiate with General Thomas Wentworth, the British special envoy. Caldwell further distinguished himself in negotiations with the British fleet in the Mediterranean and in March 1749 Maria Theresa conferred on him the title of Count of Milan. His foreign letter books, account books and passports form part of the Bagshawe muniments, deposited in the John Rylands Library, Manchester, in 1955.

Edward Gascoigne met 'Calahan' at Milan in February 1725.1 Captain and Mrs Callahan were in Leghorn in June 1728,2 and went on to Florence to see Alessandro Galilei's monument to Mrs Callahan's parents, commissioned by her brother Edward Gascoigne. The monument was already dismantled for dispatch to England, but they saw the pieces which were not packed, and Mrs Callahan was waited upon by Galilei's English wife, Letitia Henrietta Martin.2
Mr Coltrop, English' was in Rome on 25 January 1727;1 at Easter 1727 'Giacomo Calhrope' was lodging by the Piazza di Spagna, in the same house as John Boteler and Blount.2
He was in Rome in April and May 1724, escorted in his sight-seeing by Richard Rawlinson. On 5 July Calvert left Rome for Naples 'but within a mile of the gate of St John Lateran, the postillion driving into a ditch, and the chaise breaking, he was forced to return to Rome'.1 The following March in Florence he was introduced to the Grand Duke.2

Allan Cameron was in Rome by 1719,1 and by May 1726 was acting as a messenger between George Lockhart in Edinburgh and the Pretender.2  Mrs Cameron 'widow to Allen Cameron late Master of the horse to the Pretender' was in Italy in 1732. On 27 May Colman wrote that Mrs Cameron who was 'last week at Leghorn, is going through France to England & so to the Highlands of Scotland. She has several commissions for those parts from Rome and is attended by one Foster a Scotch Jesuit in secular cloaths.'3  In September 1728 a Mr and Mrs Cameron had arrived in Leghorn with a Margaret Cameron and a 'Patrick Lawless (Irish)' and went to see 'the Hayes' (i.e. Col. John Hay and his wife) at their villa at Signa.4
Inspired, no doubt, by the archaeological exploration which had led to publication of the first volume of Stuart and Revett's Antiquities of Athens in 1762 and by Adam's successful (though less than scientific) Ruins of the Palace of the Emperor Diocletian at Spalatro in 1764, Cameron set out for Rome with the specific intention of surveying the remains of the Imperial Roman Baths.1 His master Isaac Ware had intended to reissue the plates of Palladio's drawings of the baths. After the death of Ware in 1766, Cameron put out an advertisement for his forthcoming book and showed six proof prints at the Free Society of Artists in 1767.  By 1768 Cameron was in Rome. His route there is unknown, but evidence from The Baths of the Romans suggests he may have visited Bologna and Pisa. From the same source it can be deduced that he visited Nocera near Naples, and certainly he travelled to Pompeii, where he drew a plan and section of a laonicum (Soane Museum). His arrival at Rome was listed by Hayward in 1768,2 and there is a document of 14 September 1768 signed by Cameron in Rome;3 he was possibly the 'Mr Lacumien' sharing rooms in the Strada Felice in 1768-9 with James Nevay and David Allan.4  When Cameron's Baths was eventually published in 1772, it provided little more than a reissue of Burlington's Fabbriche, but three sheets of drawings from a set of more than thirty-one in the Soane Museum show that Cameron surveyed at least the Baths of Diocletian in far more detail than he was able to show in published form. On an overlay to plate 7 of his book, Cameron engraved a plan of what he took to be 'Subterraneous Vaults at the Baths of Titus', but which was actually part of Nero's Golden House below the Baths of Trajan-thus making him an unwitting but significant pioneer in the archaeology of the Golden House. Cameron stated both in his book and in a second advertisement for it (March 1770) that he had gained the personal permission of Pope Clement XIII (d. 2 February 1769) to make excavations in Rome. There is no further evidence of this, and the Roman document cited above shows that Cameron was refused permission to make very much less ambitious explorations beneath the church of Santa Cecilia in Trastevere. It also shows that Cameron knew and had the support of Thomas Jenkins in Rome.

Following the death of the Pretender Jeanie Cameron came to Rome to see the Young Pretender. On 20 September 1766 Horace Mann wrote that travelling 'with a female only [she] has been lately at Rome to make a visit and to solicit (they say) the continuance of her pension from her hero, but it is said that she did not meet with so kind a reception as at Holyrood House. She returned to Leghorn a few weeks ago, and embarked on board a merchant ship (Captain Mangle) for England' (Wal.Corr., 22:453).





A Jacobite, he joined the Pretender in March 1717 at Pesaro, where he spent a month before accompanying Lord Tullibardine back to France.1 He was possibly the Jacobite 'B. Campbell' who defended Lord Forbes of Pitsligo's conduct in Rome and left Rome in November 1719 to go to Spain.2
A Jacobite, like his cousin, he was in Rome in August 1720 when he wrote to the Pretender defending Lord Forbes of Pitsligo against Murray (Tayler 1938, 192-3).
The Donald Campbell who arrived at Venice on 26 June 17811 was also, presumably, the Campbell presented at Court in Turin, with a 'Mr Des Jacques' [doubtless David George Jacmar], on 19 April 1781, both described as 'gentilhommes Anglois'.2
He was presumably the Abbé Campbell who accompanied the younger Henry Swinburne to Italy and was in Naples in the winter of 1792-3.1 Campbell became 'a well-known character in Neapolitan society', and a close friend of Sir William Hamilton.2 A collection of Greek vases formed by the Abbé Campbell was sold in 1818 (bought by Charles Winn of Nostell Priory and subsequently sold at Christie's, 30 Apr. 1975).
Although he is known to have been a discriminating collector of antiquities and a patron of British and Italian artists in Italy, Campbell's Italian travels are not well documented. He probably made one protracted tour between 1783 and 1788. There is no evidence that he first went out in 1775 with Henry Tresham,1 the artist with whom he subsequently travelled in Sicily and whom he was to employ both as draughtsman and agent.  Campbell's friendship with Charles Greville would have recommended him to Sir William Hamilton, Greville's uncle, at Naples,2 where Campbell was staying before February 1784.3 He had apparently been in Sicily the previous year with Tresham and owned many of Tresham's Sicilian views of 1783; he also acquired many Greek vases in Sicily, presumably at this time.4 In May 1784 he was in Rome,5 and on 10 May Mary Berry spent an evening at the Villa Madama in company which included Campbell, Tresham and James Byres.6 Campbell's marble bust by Hewetson (Cawdor Castle) was probably executed that year in Rome,7 and of two Shakespearean scenes by James Durno which Campbell acquired, one was dated Rome 1784 (Sotheby's, 14 Oct. 1953). In March 1785, William Blackett wrote from Rome that 'Mr Price Campbell is going soon in a ship of his own which he has sent for from England' to visit the Grecian islands.8 Campbell was in Rome some time between December 1785 and April 1786,9 and possibly stayed there most of that year. In December 1786 he had left Rome for Naples,10 where he appears to have stayed for some time; he was there in March 1787, and on 18 March 1788 he was leaving Naples for Rome.11  Meanwhile on 16 June 1787 he had written from Naples to Canova in Rome concerning 'il mio gruppo', a commission presumably given the previous year and doubtless the celebrated marble group of Cupid and Psyche.12 In 1790 Elizabeth Gibbes saw the Cupid and Psyche in Canova's studio and said it was 'for Mr Price Campbell'.13 It was finished in 1793, but delivery was delayed, first by Campbell and then by the French invasion; it was eventually impounded and is now in the Louvre. In compensation Canova carved a reclining nude, requested in 1802 and executed in 1817 (and eventually ceded to George IV). Meanwhile Canova had finished an 'Apollo' for him in 1790,14 presumably the Amorino, paid for by Thomas Jenkins in Rome, which was sent to London apparently in 1791. Correspondence between Campbell and Canova is in the Cawdor MSS (deposited in Carmarthen RO in 1972). It would appear that Campbell's most intense activity as a collector occurred in the last year of his stay in Italy (up to April 1788), when Tresham was acting as his agent. In April 1789 Gavin Hamilton wrote that 'Mr Campbell who is a rich man and fond of pictures travelled last year all over Italy in company with an ingenious painter, in search of pictures but found none, the truth is there are none', but this was evidently an exaggeration.15 In March 1788 it was said that Durno had 'sold his Pictures to Mr Campbell for 600 pounds' (probably including the Shakespearian scenes mentioned above).16 Campbell acquired many topographical drawings by Tresham (and by Ducros, Lusieri and Xavier della Gatta), and on 28 March 1788 he sent back to England two paintings by Tresham with pictures from the schools of Giordano, Tintoretto and Durer.17 He also acquired Bellini's Doge Loredan (NG) from the Grimani Palace in Venice, and Tresham bought for him two panels by 'Masaccio' from the Casa Pucci in Florence (now in Liverpool and Polesden Lacey as by Perugino and Gherardo di Giovanni). He bought a number of carved gemstones, including a portrait of himself, from Nathaniel Marchant, whom he had met through James Byres,18 and he also employed the sculptor John Rossi. Of antiquities he bought the renowned Lante Vase (Woburn) from Volpato in 1788; Thomas Jenkins had to negotiate the export with some delicacy and it was not sent to England until 1790.19 Tresham made several purchases on his behalf from Vincenzo Pacetti between May 1787 and April 1788, including a copy of the Apotheosis of Homer,20 and on 8 and 11 April 1788 Campbell sent 'marmori diversi' back to England.21 Flaxman enthused over Campbell's antiquities, telling George Romney on 25 May 1788 of 'excellent news for the arts in England. Colonel Campbell is returning, and brings with him to London three hundred Etruscan vases, many adorned with the finest historical paintings; and a collection of all the plaister casts from the finest antiques he could purchase in Italy'.22  Campbell left Rome on 15 April,23 and was in Venice later that month.24 By July he was describing Canova's Cupid and Psyche to Quatremère de Quincy in Paris.25 Tresham was then with him, evidently returning home with him.  Much of Campbell's fine collection had to be sold in 1800 (Skinner & Dyke, 5-6 Jun. 1800). The sale catalogue described 120 Etruscan vases (some acquired during a tour of Sicily, others from excavations at Nola or from the Collegio dei Santi Apostoli in Naples); there was antique sculpture from the Orti Farnesini and the Villa Negroni in Rome. One of the vases, now known as the Cawdor Vase, is in the Soane Museum; the Lante vase was bought by the Duke of Bedford.

Campbell set out from England in 1727 as tutor to the young Charles Wyndham (later 2nd Earl of Egremont). They spent two years in Paris where Charles studied at an academy before leaving for Italy. Campbell, having met the recently widowed Lady Ferrers in Paris in 1729, then sent his charge ahead, while he and Lady Ferrers made their own way to Rome. He told Sir William Wyndham that his health had prevented him leaving Paris with his son.1 Campbell caught up with Wyndham in Turin and Venice, writing to his father on 29 December to say he had not received his letter telling them not to proceed to Italy. On 28 January Wyndham told his father from Venice that Campbell had again left him and would 'be in Rome by this time'. Stosch noticed the arrival in Rome of Campbell, Lady Ferrers and her brother, Sir Richard Levinge, on 26 January 1730, and said they would shortly go to Naples for their health. On 27 April Stosch reported that Campbell had left Rome, following Lady Ferrers towards England.2 Wyndham, on his father's instruction, had severed all links with Campbell by 13 April, when he told his father that Campbell 'received the news very cooly'. On 5 April 1732 Campbell was again in Rome, now described by Stosch as a zealous Jacobite who had often been in Italy, the last time with Lady Ferrers and the Duchess of Buckingham.3
Campion arrived in Venice with Lord Craven, George Lockhart (1700-61) and Dawkins early in December 1719, see William, 3rd Baron Craven. Later that month 'H. Campion' was with the same group in Padua.1 A 'Campioni-Inglese' was listed in Rome at Easter 1720, staying on the Scesa di S.Giuseppe.2

In July 1792 the Cannings, a Catholic family, let their home, Foxcote, while they visited Switzerland and wintered in Rome with their eldest son Francis (1772-1831). Canning's letters to his agent Cotterell in Gloucestershire1 described the ravages of the French army in Italy, but he remained radical in his beliefs (16 Feb., 7 Jun. 1793). Lady Knight wrote from Rome that 'both father and son talked so openly in Favour of the Revolution, that I shunned them. They have a conversazione on a Thursday, at which the Hippisleys, Cicciaporcis, and a Fine set meet'; Mrs Canning, 'poor woman, is only a devotee, and leaves the disaffectedness to her husband and son';2 Sir John and Lady Throckmorton also attended these Anglo-Catholic gatherings.3 Prince Augustus took lodgings in the same house as the Cannings when he returned to Rome from England in 1794.4 Sometime after January 1794 the Cannings were joined in Italy by another son John (1775-1824) who had been a student at Douai before the Revolution; he arrived in Rome having 'suffered greatly by overfatigue in getting out of France' and he was recovering from an injured foot, his father wrote from Rome (n.d., 1795).  The family were in Venice in August 1795, having arrived from Florence.5 Mrs Canning's weak health determined their homeward route home through Austria and Germany. Francis Canning made a small collection of pictures, 'which tho very inconsiderable has Cost me some money', he wrote from Rome (n.d., 1795).

With the British consul Edward Allen and his wife Catherine, Cantillion was one of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu's few friends in Naples in the winter of 1740-1.1 Lady Mary thought him 'one of the prettiest men I ever saw in any country', and hinted that he was Catherine Allen's lover.2 Joseph Spence also met Cantillion and the Allens in Naples.3
Mr and Mrs Cantillon arrived in Florence on 28 March 1725, intending to spend a few days before proceeding to England.1 Richard Cantillon is probably the 'Mr Chantiglion' who sat to Rosalba Carriera in December 1724; in her diary for 9 February 1728 Rosalba listed a portrait for 'Mr di Cantilion'.2


He signed a Leghorn merchants' memorial in May 1744;1 he died on 2 June and was buried at Leghorn.2
He was possibly also the Capithorne met by Thomas Hollis at Messina in 1752 (see Hollis).
She accompanied Lady Orford and Giulio Mozzi from London to Italy in 1770 and remained with them until Lady Orford's death in 1781; she returned to England with the 3rd Earl of Cowper's children in May 1781 (Wal. Corr., 25:151, 169).

While in Rome with Lord Shelburne Carleton became 'well acquainted' with the Abbé Grant, who ten years later applied to him for commissions in the army for two of his nephews.1

Although he was to become a discerning collector of old master paintings, Lord Carlisle's visit to Italy, made immediately after he had left Cambridge, was a rapid affair involving few purchases. From Antibes on 8 December 1767 he told his great friend George Selwyn, 'I intend to go through Italy as fast as I can. I certainly shall not be more than a year. In that time I hope ... to be able to speak Italian to be understood and read it perfectly'.1 He arrived in Turin on 24 January 1768 with Lord Kildare, their passage over the Alps having been delayed a day by winds and snow. Carlisle did not enjoy Turin: 'the whole day is spent in visiting; you go to the opera only to make visits into people's boxes to whom you have been presented' (243). February was very cold, the streets 'covered with ice, and the houses with snow' (251), but he amused himself with the thought that his dog Rover should be painted by Batoni and he was then entertained by hearing that, as Lent began, 'sins during the Carnival, are so very numerous that I believe the monks are forced to absolve them by the lump' (254, 256). He studied Spanish and Italian while he waited for the arrival of his Knight of the Thistle insignia, which was conferred upon him by the King of Sardinia on 27 February and then, with Kildare and Thomas Potter, he passed over the Apennines to Genoa ('a little botanical knowledge would have made this journey more agreeable'; 284). Kildare came to consider Carlisle 'a great coxcomb' who despised everybody, 'especially foreigners', but he noticed that the ladies 'were very much inclined to be in love with him, which I do not wonder at, as he is certainly a pretty man and his green ribbon [the Thistle] became him much'.2 After three days in Genoa Carlisle considered he had 'seen everything worth observation': some 'glorious pictures' and some 'noble palaces', but 'no antiquities of consequence here. One of the streets is truly magnificent indeed; a row of palaces on each side, faced with marble ... more like scenery than real houses' (284-5).  He waited for his friend Charles James Fox (with whom he had been in France the previous year) who was sailing from Nice. Together they passed through Parma, whose fine pictures would 'have furnished my new wing [at Castle Howard] ... very well', and Bologna, where he found 'the finest pictures in the world' (291), to Florence; the pending arrival of Maria Carolina, the new Queen of Naples, encouraged them to depart for Rome where they had arrived by the end of April. 'I have now seen very perfectly Turin, Genoa, Piacenza, Regio, Parma, Bologna, Florence, the Vatican, St Peter's, and two palaces here. About six weeks more will complete it', he wrote (295), sufficient to admire all the well-known pictures and antiquities, and to kiss the Pope's toe. At Naples, 'one of the finest cities in the world', he was 'magnificently lodged' in the consul's house. He climbed Vesuvius at night and told Selwyn that he had so far bought 'two small landscapes of Gaspar Poussin, and two copies of pictures at Florence; for, next to having fine originals, copies of beautiful pictures are preferable to indifferent ones of good masters' (298-9). He visited Herculaneum, noting that 'it is very difficult to buy anything of the workmen, as there is a guard always over them when they dig'; there was a bal masqué and a great dinner for the new Queen, with much finery but, observed Carlisle, 'at night all those fine clothes are deposited in the pawn-broker's shop, and the poor owners starve for the rest of the year on one dish of macaroni a-day' (302-4). On his return to Rome he visited Cicero's Villa ('where the Tusculan questions were wrote. You may easily fancy with what reverence I beheld this scene'), and commissioned a picture of it, telling 'the man to keep the drawing, lest you [Selwyn] should like to have a copy'. But he was not acquiring works of art on a grand scale: 'I only mean to get a few things for my own dressing room' (305). 'I shall have finished Rome in three weeks more, so as to have seen everything perfectly, and the principal things twice or three times. I am out on this business seven or eight hours every day', he wrote (308); a Mr Harrison was his cicerone (and subsequently travelled north with him). At the end of his stay in Rome he sat to Nollekens for his marble bust, now at Castle Howard,3 'the man assures me it will be very like' (311), and he acquired a Piranesi drawing of a coach with antique ornaments, which he intended having made on his return to England (312).  Carlisle's last letter from Italy (318) described how he was confined to his chair in Venice by gnat bites; it was dated Venice, 2 August, although the Venetian records reported his arrival on 20 August.4 He stayed a week in Venice and left Italy through Piacenza and Verona, whose buildings delighted him, and none more than the theatre at Piacenza (320). By December 1768 Carlisle was in Paris, where his dog Rover, who had survived a broken leg in Florence (but had not been painted by Batoni), was run over by a coach; ibat et ad Stygias nobilis umbra plagas, commented his afflicted master, whose Latin apparently remained more serviceable than his Italian (352).
On his first tour (as Viscount Morpeth) he was in Padua in December 1714 with George Chardin (later his secretary) and Ralph Carr.1 He was then in Venice until the end of February 1715, when he left with Lord Essex and Robert Mansell for Rome.2 William Kent noticed him in Rome in letters of 16 April and 20 July;3 he became acquainted with the antiquarian Ficoroni4 and at the end of the year, when he had returned to Venice, Lord Harrold observed that 'My Ld Morpeth and several other young Gentlemen I have mett with since their return from Rome, have laid some money, as two or three hundred pounds in those things [medals etc.] in order to acquire taste and knowledge of antiquitys and form a little Cabinet and Series of them'.5 Morpeth also lost considerable sums in Robert Brown's gaming house in Venice.6 On his second visit, made shortly after his succession as the 4th Earl of Carlisle, he was accompanied by his son, Charles, Lord Morpeth (1719-41). Morpeth had been studying at Caen, but left unexpectedly (possibly for health reasons) and was in Venice with his father by November 1738.7 To judge from his subsequent correspondence, Carlisle then met in Venice the antiquarian A.M. Zanetti;8 by June 1740 seventeen paintings by Canaletto had arrived in Yorkshire through his agency.9 In Rome he again met Ficoroni and Stosch and he acquired gems from Cardinal Pietro Ottoboni.10 He commissioned a remarkable series of six capricci by Panini,11 and invited the painter Andrea Casali to come to England.12 By 19 June father and son had arrived in Florence from Leghorn; they departed on 26 July, intending to sail to France.13 At Pont Beau Voisin in September Lady Mary Wortley Montagu discovered an ailing Lord Morpeth being 'carry'd in a Litter. His Distemper has been the Bloody Flux'.14 They were back in England by 8 November 1739; Lord Morpeth was to die in August 1741 of a 'venereal distemper which he caught in Italy'.15  The greater part of Lord Carlisle's outstanding collection of engraved gems passed to the British Museum in 1890.
On the death of her husband in 1758 the Countess was accounted 'the youngest, handsomest and wittiest widow in England',1 but her second marriage to Sir William Musgrave the following year was to be dissolved within two years. Much of her time thereafter was spent on the Continent. She was said to have been in Florence in 1768.2 In November 1772 she was at Bologna3 in the company of a Baron de Wenheim,4 presumably the 'unhappy attachment' then mentioned by Lady Mary Coke.5 She went on to Florence where Dr Tissot advised her 'to fix at Rome for the air',6 but she appears to have passed through Rome late in December7 on her way to Naples.8 By March 1773 she was again in Rome where she later presented Lord Winchilsea to the Princess Corsini; in April she went again to Naples.9  In December 1774 she was again in Rome,10 and it was probably on this visit that 'Larcher', the soi-disant Baron de Wenheim, was refused admittance to the Jacobite court, since the Young Pretender's wife denied his claim to noble rank.11 Lady Carlisle was living in France in 1778 and was finally brought back to England in 1781.12
Carlyle was chaplain to Lord Elgin's embassy for Constantinople in 1799. They sailed into Palermo on 3 October, a month after leaving Portsmouth,1 and moved on to Messina; Carlyle made a brief excursion to the foot of Mount Etna, keeping note of 'every minute object ... in the light in which it first struck me'2 and he was favourably impressed by the Sicilian clergy, their fluent Latin and knowledge of literature. By mid-November the party was at Pera in Turkey.2 Carlyle passed through Italy on his return home in 1801.3
An amiable nobleman of moderate abilities and capricious disposition (DNB), Lord Carmarthen first went to Italy in 1769 with his tutor, the Rev. Thomas Crofts. They were in Florence in November 17691 and spent the following summer in Naples, remaining there until October 1770.2 In November Crofts wrote from Florence to William Hamilton at Naples, announcing a plan to follow the Court to Pisa in mid-December, 'for a few days Trial: I fancy my Lord on the Experiment will prefer Florence, tho' (thank God) here will be no Duchesses'.3 Carmarthen's pamphlets 'Political Intelligence January 1771' and 'Annual Register' (a squib on European events) were both written in Florence.4 Crofts wrote to Hamilton on the eve of their departure from Florence: 'My Lord has had his fill of Dancing & Music but most sagely avoided Attachedment of any sort. We decamp tomorrow and shall spend these two months in traversing Lombardy. A letter will find me either at Mr Holfords at Genoa [James Holford, the British consul] about the end of the Month, or chez Annoni & Perego à Milano till about the 7th of April or chez Jean Michel Wagner à Venise till the 11th of May ... Mr [the Hon. Frederick] Irby brings the money for my Lord's Pictures which you will be so good as to direct him where to pay'.5 Carmarthen and Crofts arrived in Genoa on 23 March 1771.6 In June 1773 Hamilton told his nephew that 'Lord Carmarthen's pictures are with the painter Antoniani [?Pietro Antoniani], waiting for his Lordship's directions'.7 A plate in Piranesi's Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778] is dedicated to Carmarthen, 'amatore delle belle arti'. As 5th Duke of Leeds, he was again in Rome in October 1794, see George, Marquess of Carmarthen.
Carmarthen was in Turin in September 1794, when Lord Longford described him as 'one of the pleasantest young men and quite a Gentleman'. He found Carmarthen's Swiss companion, Captain Seigneux[?], a gentleman also, and he told his sister [Mrs Stewart] they were to travel together.1 At the end of October Hippisley presented Carmarthen and the Swiss Captain to the Pope, with Carmarthen's father, the 5th Duke of Leeds, and William Pitt Amherst.2 Carmarthen's intention was then to leave Rome for Naples after Christmas.3 With Longford he gave a ball in Naples, and 'danced every night during the Carnival'.4 Lady Webster said that Carmarthen 'and a few other English added novelty to our parties' in Tuscany, apparently referring to the spring of 1795.5 In May 1795 Carmarthen went from Padua to Venice, staying for three weeks before returning to Padua on 25 May.6 On 30 August 1795 Lady Plymouth wrote to Lady Bruce that Carmarthen had been 'confin'd by illness at Milan'.7 On 1 June 1796 the Duke of Leeds went to St James's to present his son, who had returned from his travels.8
Lord Carmichael was in Padua in December 1720 with his tutor, Theocharis Dadichi;1 he had been in Hanover in 1719 and Berlin in the spring of 1720.2 His second visit to Italy was paid while on leave from the garrison at Minorca in 1728. He arrived in Rome with two other officers, Hering and Abercromby, and after spending a month in the city, shortly before Christmas 1728, they left for Naples with a Mr Brickenden; on 18 January Carmichael, Hering and Abercromby returned to Rome from Naples with 'the poet Jacobs' [Hildebrand]. Carmichael and Hering left Rome to return to Mahon, Minorca, on 27 March 1729.3
At Easter 1742 Carmichael was listed staying near the Piazza di Spagna with Alexander Wright.1 In Rome he sat to Agostino Masucci for an informal portrait dated 1742 (priv. coll.).
Cav.ri Dutton, Hilican et Carmichael' passed through Capua on 17 May 1761,1 'Hilican' doubtless being Milliken. Sometime between July and December 1761 Carmichael was presented in Turin to the Duchess of Savoy, with Dutton, Samuel Kendrick and Thomas and James Milliken; the 'younger ladies of honour' finding the names particularly amusing.2
Chevr. Carnegie and is brother' [John b. 1757, or George, b. 1759] were reported to be in Florence by Lord Cowper on 31 March 1778.1 James Byres guided him round Rome in April 1778, depriving Colin Morison 'of the pleasure I should have had in being useful in that respect'.2 The diary of his first Italian journey is at Southesk (NRA[S] 792).  His second visit was made with his wife in 1791. They were in Venice from 6 to 16 October 1791,3 and were listed in Rome on 12 December 1791,4 though Thomas Brand mentioned in a letter of 10 December that he had already seen Lady Carnegie in Naples.5 There they spent the winter on good terms with Lord and Lady Malmesbury.6 Lady Carnegie, according to Lady Malmesbury, spoke Italian 'wonderfully', drew well and was liked by everybody. At the beginning of April the Carnegies were in Rome and Lady Carnegie, 'whose eagerness is most entertaining', followed a course of antiquities with Lady Malmesbury. From Florence on their homeward journey they were accompanied by Lady Malmesbury (whose husband had been recalled to England). They were in Milan early in May and back in England in August.

A Jacobite, he was in Lucerne from December 1716 to January 1717 as envoy to the States of Switzerland, seeking a residence for the Pretender.1 He had arrived in Pesaro by 27 March 1717,2 and was probably the Carnegie mentioned among many Jacobites in Venice in March.3 He was writing from Rome on 17 and 21 July, 4 August and 25 September, and on 26 September he left Rome for Florence.4 He was also probably the Carnegie listed in Italy in December 1717 and in Urbino in April 1718,5 and the Carnegie who was 'in very good friendship' with Forbes of Pitsligo in Rome in 1719.6

One of the most beautiful women of her time, but to whom nature had been sparing of intellectual attractions', she was Lady of the Bedchamber to the Duchess of Gloucester and mistress of the Duke,1 with whom she travelled in Italy. In Rome in April 1787, she sat to Angelica Kauffman for an 'English life size head, including one hand'; the portrait (priv. coll.), probably commissioned by the Duke of Gloucester, was paid for by Thomas Jenkins.2 While in Rome the Gloucesters and Lady Almeria apologised to Horatio Mann, whom they had rebuffed the previous year at Genoa, apparently on account of Lady Almeria's former affections for him.3
Shortly after becoming MP for Morpeth in April 1717, Carpenter travelled in the Low Countries, France and Italy, apparently as a charge of the Jacobite Duke of Gordon (see Alexander, Marquess of Huntly). In September 1717 the Earl of Mar was told it was 'odd that he [Gordon] should carry young Carpenter about everywhere with him'.1 By the end of October the Duke of Gordon and Carpenter were reported in Genoa, and they left by felucca for Leghorn on 1 November 1717.2 (George Carpenter is not to be confused with his near relation, Colonel Robert Carpenter, who died at the battle of Fontenoy in 1745). The anonymous manuscript 'Remarks on severall parts of Flanders; Brabant; France; and Ittally. in the year 1717'3 has been attributed to Carpenter. It describes a tour made through Paris, Turin, Alexandria, Genoa, Lerici, Viareggio, Leghorn, Pisa, Florence, Siena, Rome, Florence, Bologna, Modena, Parma, Piacenza, Milan and Turin. From Paris the diarist travelled with Thomas Dixon (who was wounded at Modena and later died at Turin). In Florence he noted the excessive jealousy of Florentine men, who locked up their wives in Centerone 'more here than they doe in any other part of Ittally: they are sold as publickly in the shopps as shoes are in England'. In Rome he described an audience with the Pope ('one of the Politest Princes and Finest Gentlemen in Europe') and commented on various Roman customs, the high incidence of murders, castrato singers and bawdy houses; he also had standard praise for the classical splendours of the city.

Carr was travelling with a brother [possibly Ralph]. On 15 December 1739 he wrote from Rome expressing some disappointment: 'the lower part of fine Palaces being frequently let off and divided into little Shops ye Greatness & Meanness are so jumbled together ... that the appearance they make upon the whole is but very indifferent'.1 A second letter written on 7 May 1740 describes the interregnum between Pope Clement XII and his successor Benedict XIV and a Jesuit recruitment of penitents in the Piazza Navona. On completing their course on antiquities the brothers planned to take the waters at Viterbo, after which, wrote Carr, it would be too hot to consider the return to England.
John Carr had made a continental tour in 1788-9, which would have included Italy had he not caught malaria in Vienna.1 His second tour, two years later, was made with his sister Harriet, an amateur artist who required a warm climate for her health. They travelled directly to Italy,2 intending to stay abroad a year but, because of the French wars, they eventually spent three years in Italy. John carefully managed their finances, and remained much concerned to bring his sister back 'in perfect health'.  They met torrential rain in Turin where they had to stay until the roads became passable. There was then congenial society in Milan where the Princess Castiglione gave them introductions for other towns. After two weeks they set out for Florence, passing through Parma and Bologna where Harriet was so enthralled with the Bolognese painters that she 'scarce thought [herself] on Earth' (21 Nov.). They spent ten days in Florence before wintering in Rome. Their time was spent quietly, but included visits to artists' studios with Henry Swinburne. Towards the end of January 1792 they visited Naples, staying with 'Mareschalchi', master of chapel and 'a very great rascal'. They returned to Rome in March, intending to proceed to Venice in April, but the military 'confusion' north of the Alps made them change their plans and on 26 May they left Rome for Florence, which was to be their home for the next eighteen months.  Harriet's health improved and she was busy as an artist. She had painted a water-colour miniature of Lady Hamilton, dated Naples 11 February 1792 and inscribed by Emma: 'I had the happiness of my dear Miss Carr's Company all day - but alas the day was too short',3 and on 25 March 1792 Mrs Flaxman and Mrs Hare-Naylor called to see Harriet's drawings in Rome.4 In February 1792 Harriet had applied to copy Titian's Venus in the Uffizi5 (where one of her drawings is preserved). She was particularly respected in Florence, receiving 'more civility and even friendship from the Italians than I dare say ever English woman did before her', wrote her brother (19 Nov. 1792), who later alleged that Harriet was 'the idol of the Italian Ladies'; 'there is scarce a hat a cap or a gown that they have not beg'd to have a copy, and seeing her and Lady Hervey on horseback every morning, many of them have attempted to ride in the English way' (12 Dec.). It was a very hot summer in Florence and they led a tedious life. John Carr observed that the English were no longer as influential as they had been in Horace Mann's time (20 Jul.), but by September they were still arriving in crowds, there being some thirty guests at evening gatherings (24 Sep.), and the following February Carr commented that 'never were known so many English families in Italy as this year' (3 Feb. 1793). The Carrs watched the Carnival, during which, as John observed, 'the whole town appears to be mad' (12 Jan. 1793). In February the French formally declared war and many French artists arrived from Rome 'with their short-cut Hair, & High-crown Hats, resembling ... the Oliverian Round-Heads' (23 Feb.). In the summer of 1793 they spent some time with the Marchesa Venturi (who had a special regard for Harriet) at her house outside Florence and they visited Siena in September and again in November.  On 19 November 1793 they set out for Rome where they were particularly well received. 'Having been so long in Italy we are looked upon as half naturalised, and find every door open to receive us', wrote John, and the Princess Santa Croce 'charged herself with the trouble of presenting us every where' (1 Dec.). They again visited Naples in February and then, back in Rome in March, John described their plans to return home. When the roads were clear of 'the great crowd of English' they would return to Florence and proceed north through Innsbruck and Frankfurt. John Carr was presumably the 'Giovanni Kar Inglese' in Bergamo in July 1794.6 At the end, Harriet had successfully fought her illness through her 'fortitude and constancy of mind' (24 Apr. 1794) and, as an artist, she had been complimented by Lord Berwick as excelling 'all ladies in practise that are at present distinguished'.7 John had collected choice early editions of the classics and later Italian literature, while observing his resolution not to buy 'anything of cost' (19 Nov. 1792).  Two of Harriet's portraits of her brother existed in 1893, one at Dunston Hill, the other (now untraced) showing John Carr in classical drapery before a colonnade with a view of the temple of Vesta; her own portrait in water-colour, painted by Thaim in Florence in 1794, was at Badger Hall, Salop., in 1893.8 As the widowed Mrs Cheney, Harriet was to return to Italy in 1836.
Ralph Carr was in Padua in December 1714,1 on the same day as Lord Morpeth (later 4th Earl of Carlisle) and George Chardin; the next month he was in Venice with Morpeth and a larger party, 'to enjoy the Carneval'.2 In February 1723 Carr was again in Padua, with John Whitelocke and William Wickham.3



On 3 January 1729 Stosch reported that Carrington, a Catholic, with his governor Howard, a Benedictine monk, were frequenting Jacobites in Rome. Carrington left on 17 May with Sir Robert Throckmorton but without Howard, who joined the Pretender's suite (SP 85/16, ff.486, 538).
Father Carroll accompanied Lord Stourton's son, Charles Philip, on his European tour 1771-3, and his travel diary has been published.1 In Rome he avoided Jesuit houses, alarmed at the impending suppression of the Society, and in Bologna he bought a picture which he gave to Father Thorpe in Rome.2



Encouraged by the success of his subject pictures at the SA in 1773,1 Carter set out for Rome at the end of August 1774 to further his career. He travelled with J.S. Copley, who described him as 'a Gentleman who is about forty lately ingaged in painting [who] has the french and Italian langage',2 but they were not good companions. Allan Cunningham later described Carter as 'a captious, cross-grained, and self-conceited person, who kept a regular journal of his tour, in which he remorselessly set down the smallest trifle that could bear a construction unfavourable to the American's character'.3 They separated on arrival in Rome on 26 October 1774, Copley then describing Carter as 'a sort of snail which crawled over a man in his sleep, and left its slime and no more'.4 In Rome Carter met several other artists, including Romney, Humphry and Peters;5 he sent two pictures from Rome to the RA in 1775 (when his presence in Rome was noted by Hayward).6 He was conceivably the Carter who arrived in Venice with a 'Mr Bertis'[?] on 26 July 1775.7 In 1776 Carter gave a London address in the RA catalogue. Carter's diary of his grand tour is in a private collection.8

Mary Carter had been at Lausanne with the widowed Lady Clarges in 1785-6. Charles Blagden met her with Lady Palmerston in Geneva in August 1792,1 and he and Mary Carter were both with them at Naples during the winter 1792-3,2 being presented with them to the King, and joining one of their excursions round the Bay of Naples.3 She stayed with the Palmerstons throughout the remainder of their Italian tour, describing some of her experiences in letters which were subsequently published (Carter Letters). In June 1794 she wrote to Horace Walpole, enclosing a present of mineral specimens and signing herself 'Moll Volatile Evaporated'; by July she declared herself thoroughly homesick and ready to return, 'whether the Palmerstons do or not', though she told Walpole 'I have had a most pleasant and agreeable tour'.4

In 1774 Father Thorpe recalled that 'there was a Cartwright here [in Rome] some time ago, who studied figures, for the purpose of history or portrait painting: but he was very slow & shewed more inclination than genius. I frequently met him contemplating the works of Raphael in the Vatican: perhaps he may have fallen down into a Landscape painter. The fall is not uncommon, but I do not know that he made it with any reputation or whether he be now in Italy or not'.1 A week later Thorpe added that Cartwright had 'no abilities for painting anything of his own', but had been encouraged and patronised in Italy by the 3rd Duke of Dorset, who had commissioned two 'views' from him before the end of 1774.2 Cartwright met and admired Fuseli in Rome and when Fuseli arrived in London in 1779 they shared rooms.3
A man said to be Lord Foreland's son has arrived and is to follow his father to Naples', Stosch reported from Rome on 7 October 1724.1 His movements (and those of his father, Lord Falkland, a Jacobite loyalist then living in France) were observed with interest from both sides of the Channel. Cary left Rome for Venice on 28 January 1725, travelling 'by way of Loreto' with the Irish Jacobite Nicholas Wogan.2 He was in Venice by 6 February, when he sat to Rosalba Carriera ('Incominciato in picciolo Mr Cheri, inglese').3 On 17 February Cary, Wogan and five others were in Padua, 'all safe and sound arrived from the Carnavale of Venice'.4
On Christmas Eve 1704 the Duke of Shrewsbury was visited by 'two young Carys, lately come from Lisbone, with an Irish Dominican, and an Irish priest', and a few weeks later in February Shrewsbury visited the Carys 'and the Roman seminary Mr Tufnail [Samuel Tufnell]' (Shrewsbury Jnl., 23 Dec. 1704, 6 Feb. 1705).
Having sold his estates in Sussex, Lord Caryll joined the Young Pretender's household, probably in 1767. He was formally appointed his secretary in 17721 (his predecessor Andrew Lumisden had been dismissed in 1768), though his remuneration was confined to a 'table and lodging';2 'he has not even dogs-wages for his trouble, but does all for stark love and kindness'.3 He had previously been sent to Paris in 1770 to seek French approval for Charles's marriage, returning to Rome in October 17714 and he escorted Charles's young bride, the Princess Louise of Stolberg-Gedern, from Loreto to Macerata for the marriage on 17 April 1772.5 Thereafter he was at the centre of Charles's unsuccessful and blustering negotiations with the Pope concerning his title and status.6 Caryll sympathised with Charlotte, Charles's daughter, in her vain plea to her father for support in 1773-4 and he showed much sympathy for Princess Louise as she became disenchanted with her husband. Caryll too grew increasingly uncomfortable with Charles's intemperance, and in March 1775 Caryll and his wife left for Rome to attend urgent family business, despite Charles's insistence that no member of his household should go to Rome before the Pope had approved his royal title. It was then said that Caryll intended to pass his retirement in Flanders,7 but he was again acting for Charles at Versailles c.1785.8 He died in Dunkirk 'in poverty and distress' in 1788. His cousin John Farquharson remembered him as 'one of the genteelest, best-bred men I ever knew'.3

John Casely (or Chisel?) was employed as a painter at the Royal Porcelain Factory at Naples between 1771 and 1804. In 1787 he left Naples for England to accompanying the huge 'Etruscan service', destined for King George III (A. Lane, Italian Porcelain [1954], 61-2).




Variously described as governess, cousin or sister-in-law, she was part of Edward Wortley Montagu's retinue when he left England in January 1761: 'he has a sister-in-law with him - as he calls her - a Miss Cast - you will see a good name for one of his females.'1 Miss Cast occasionally acted in loco parentis to his daughter Mary while the girl was at the Ursuline convent in Rome.2 On 25 October 1763 James Martin paid a visit in Leghorn to 'Mrs Carte [sic], a relation of Mr Wortley Montague, who came abroad with him'.3 After a period of travelling in the Middle East and Italy, Wortley Montagu rejoined Miss Cast in Pisa in December 1765.2 See also Edward Wortley Montagu (1713-76).



He was possibly the 'Castleton' at Turin some time between October 1739 and September 1740.1 In October he was part of a group in Florence which included Samuel Dashwood, George Pitt and his tutor Edward Holdsworth;2 the four travelled together to Rome, going through Pisa, Leghorn and Siena early in November 1740.3 In Rome Castleton shared lodgings with Pitt,4 near Lord Lincoln, and in March Lincoln invited Pitt, Dashwood and Castleton to dine with Lady Pomfret, who had previously entertained them in Florence.5 Castleton left Rome on 4 May 1741, having made an expedition to Naples in March: '[Mr Castleton] generously took me with him to Naples, in company with the E. of L[incoln]', wrote James Russel, who later dedicated a plate in the first volume of his Letters to 'Nath. Castleton'.6

Castres was secretary to Henry Davenant, the British envoy at Florence, Modena, Parma and Genoa; in 1721-2 he acted as chargé d'affaires at Genoa during the envoy's absence.1 At Easter 1722 Davenant and Castres were staying in Rome,2 and in September Davenant and his secretary 'Mr de Castro' were setting out from Florence for Leghorn.3 On 12 January 1723 they were in Padua, evidently on their return to England.4 Castres subsequently published Ways and Means for suppressing Beggary, and Relieving the Poor, by erecting General Hospitals, and Charitable Corporations [1726], which he had translated from an Italian treatise of 1717 and dedicated to Robert Walpole. The proposals had been followed in Piedmont and Savoy, and then Genoa, so that 'that State was thereby freed at once from all its Beggars. This I was Witness to, while I had the Honour of being Mr D'Avenant's secretary in Italy'. His translation had carefully omitted 'all that might give Offence in Point of Religion, or was not proper in a Protestant Country, or inconsistent with this Constitution'.
With his companion William Jennings (or Jennens) he arrived in Padua from Rome on 8 May 1722,1 and left for Venice the next day; on 2 June 1722 they were at the opera at Bologna with Lord Charles Fitzroy and John Ramsden.2

A timber merchant, 'rough in his manners, acute in his judgment, skilful in trade, and solid in property', he was the friend of Henry Thrale. Of their tour of Italy his wife spoke to Mrs Thrale only of her portable mat, 'a Piece of Paper which I carried with me from Turin to Naples, and set my foot on it every Night when I stept into Bed'.1 Mr and Mrs 'Thomas' Cator with Charles Collinson arrived at Venice on 19 June 1770,2 presumably Mr and Mrs John Cator with one of Mrs Cator's brothers.
Caulet travelled in Italy with Joseph Mercer. He wrote to his sisters in London from Florence on 14 November 1778, describing his journey from Leghorn; there (Thomas) Panton had assured him that Patch was dead, but he found this to be untrue when he reached Florence,1 see Thomas Patch.

A son of ye Duke of Devonshire' arrived in Rome on 21 February 1723; Lord Charles Cavendish set out from Rome for Naples on the 25th, and on 2 May 'the Lords Cavendish' (which must also refer to Lord James, his elder brother) left Rome for Florence and England.1 Lord Charles was again in Italy with his wife c.1730. Their return to England was reported in August 1732: 'Lord Charles Cavendish & his Lady in from Rome and Italy there about two years'.2

Lords George and Frederick Cavendish went to Italy in 1749 accompanied by their learned tutor Dr Robert Lowth (who was subsequently Bishop of Oxford and London). Lowth wrote to Joseph Spence from Turin on 11 July 1749 and from Naples on 1 March 1750.1 They were in Rome by 14 March when Lord Malton (later 2nd Earl of Rockingham) commented that the Cavendishes were 'both very promising lads', one with 'a surprising Genius in drawing Fortification'.2 James Russel met them in Rome in October 1750, and later remembered how he had been prevented from guiding them round Rome because Lowth had spilled scalding water on his leg which had laid him up for six weeks.3
Lord George Cavendish was in Lausanne in September 1773,1 and in Rome by the end of 1774.2 In January 1775 he was in Naples where Hamilton thought he had much of the 'Cavendish oddity'.3 He had arrived with Lord Monson, Lewis Thomas Watson and Henry Peirse, and was one of the party of Englishmen who lost over £2000 playing cards with the King.4 He was back in Rome soon after, lodging by the Piazza di Spagna.5


He was presumably the 'Milord Conventifs' in Florence on 29 February 1772.1 He was in Rome that summer and in Venice in November,2 and he was presumably also the 'Milord Cavendish' who had passed through Capua on 14 July 1772.3 He sat to Batoni in Rome for a portrait dated 1773 (Chatsworth; Clark/Bowron 360). Lord Richard returned to Italy for the last year of his life. He was in Florence by 21 October 1780,4 and in 1781 spent two months in Rome attended by James Byres, with whom he toured Sicily in April 1781.5 On his return to Naples he fell ill with dysentery and died on 7 September.6 'He was a worthy man', said James Irvine, 'but something of an oddity';7 Patrick Home thought him 'full of English prejudices - Sensible'.8
Thomas and Isabella Cayley travelled in France, Switzerland and Italy c.1770-1 'in search of health for Mr Cayley, and the means of living during the lifetime of his father Sir George Cayley'.1 At Nice in the winter of 1770-1 Jane Graham had observed a group of travellers, 'an overwhelming mixture of Scotch English & Irish' comprising Smiths, Synnots and Cayleys, a silent party except for Mrs Cayley whose utterances were as 'Thunder and lightning in a sun shine day'; Mr Cayley bore an expression of 'eternal fear nay terror'.2 The Synnots, Sir Walter and his wife Jane, were Mrs Cayley's brother-in-law and sister;3 they were said to have married in Italy, and Jane Synnot was then 'six months gone' with her first child.2 While in Florence Isabella Cayley spent much time painting in oils, and she was also known for her original political and religious opinions.4 Piranesi later dedicated a plate in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778] to Jane Synnot. Mary Berry claimed that it was the accounts brought back by her aunts Cayley and Synnot after 'two or three years' in Italy, which first inspired her to visit Italy for herself.1
Charles Cecil fled to Italy after a duel in Paris in 1691 in which he killed one of his brothers.1 His sister-in-law, Frances, Lady Salisbury, was with him in Rome 1701, and she was with the Hon. George Cecil (probably George, Charles's younger brother), in Padua on 2 June 1701.2 The Duke of Shrewsbury saw a Mr Cecil in Rome on 21 November and dined with him on 12 December (but this may have been William Cecil, see below).3 Robert Sharpe records a discussion with 'Mr. Cicile my Lord Salesberry's son' on 5 December 1701.4  Charles Cecil was found drowned in the Lago di Costello near his house at Albano at the end of July 1702; '[Mr Cecil] had filled his shirt and pockets with stones, to be sure to sink', the Duke of Shrewsbury recorded, 'he had been melancholy ever since the misfortune of killing his brother.'5
Charles Cecil accompanied his sister Margaret to Italy. In October 1724 they had reached Paris, where at Easter 1725 Margaret married Robert Brown, who had long been established in Venice. All three arrived in Venice, via Lyons and Turin, at the end of May 1725.1 Cecil was in Padua on 15 June.2 'I should be very much pleased to stay in this country some years', he told Thomas Coke on 6 June, and on 3 August his sister told Coke that 'My brother gets the start of me quite in Italian, as he did in French, by his great application'.3 In April 1726 Cecil visited Naples and Rome, intending to be back in Venice for Ascension; in Rome he saw the newly discovered marble Livia, of which he sent drawings to Coke in a letter from Venice of 4 October.4

Will. Cecil' was expected back in Rome from Malta late in December 1700,1 and must therefore have been the Cecil who went to Sicily and Malta with John Dryden between 7 November 1700 and 14 January 1701, see Dryden. A bust of William Cecil by Francesco Maratti remains at Burghley.2 See the Hon. Charles Cecil, with whom William may sometimes have been confused.


After studying under Ramsay in Edinburgh, Chalmers spent some time in Rome in the early 1750s. He later told Margaret Forbes that he had made the journey by sea to Leghorn for £10 'in 19 days from the Downs in the month of October'.1 He may have been the Chalmers in Rome to whom Isabella Lumisden sent her compliments in a letter (addressed to her brother Andrew) of 16 February 1750.2 Chalmers's unfinished portrait of Lumisden was executed in Rome in 17533 and he also enjoyed Jacobite patronage from the Earl of Winton and Alexander Hay of Drummelzier.4 A S.Cecilia and a Herodias by 'Chambers' [Chalmers] were sent to Ralph Howard from Rome in January 1753,5 and 'Giorgio Calmers Scozzese eret Pitte-30' was living in the Strada Felice, in the house of 'de Grisoni' at Easter 1753.6 Before returning home Chalmers is said to have visited Florence and Minorca.4  In 1768 Chalmers married Isabella, sister of the painter Cosmo Alexander who had been in Rome from 1747 until June 1751.


With his tutor Patrick Guthrie, Chamber was in Padua on 23 March 1724.1 They travelled directly to Rome and Naples, whence they had returned to Rome by 13 May,2 staying until 14 July.3 After several months probably spent in Siena they arrived in Florence at the end of March 1725.4 Their departure in August was hampered by a dispute with an Irish tailor, Dennis Scully, who refused the money they offered in payment of his bill and had their luggage seized.5 At Parma Chamber fell ill with smallpox, but had recovered sufficiently by 30 October to write to Thomas Coke about the pictures he had bought there, 'a fine Bassan, that did not cost me fifty shillings' and 'several others that want baptizing'; he was about to leave Italy, he said, 'after two years stay in it with regret'.6
In 1736 he rented a house from Robert Bateman in the Venezia Nuova, Leghorn.1 Both Chamberlain and Bateman signed the return of English residents in Leghorn in March 1743.2
Chamberlain (or Chamberlayne) appears to have lived at Messina, before leaving in May 1702, following the outbreak of the Spanish War, to take up temporary residence in Leghorn.1 His patent was renewed in June 1706 and in January 1715.2 On 31 January 1718 Thomas Chamberlayne and 'Ra. Lee' wrote from Messina to Thomas Coke concerning two marble tables which were to be sent on to him from the Marquis of Trevi.3 By August 1718 Chamberlain had been arrested in Messina by the Spanish and he remained a prisoner from 1718 to 1720.4 When he resigned as consul in 1725 he was succeeded by his nephew, William Chamberlain.5
He was probably the Chamberlain, an Irishman, whom the Pretender made a gentleman of the bedchamber in 1731.1 He was also probably the 'Chamberlayn' whom Richard Pococke met at Rome in March 1734.2 In 1734 Chamberlain was made the so-called English consul at the papal port of Civitavecchia. The Roman authorities had wished to have Richard Gaven, the son of a shipowner, but his religion had proved an insuperable obstacle. Thereupon Gaven, with Sir Thomas Dereham, promoted the 'very young' Thomas 'Chamberlayne', believing he could himself still retain any profits, but Chamberlain ousted him altogether.  In 1736 Chamberlain was sent to Florence as a Jacobite agent to kill the British spy, John Dixon.3 On 31 January 1736 Charles Fane wrote an account of a fight between Dixon and Chamberlain (whom he described as a nephew of the HM's consul in Sicily) in which Dixon was severely wounded.4 In 1738 and 1739 Chamberlain was living in Rome in the parish of S.Andrea delle Fratte, described as Irish, aged 19 in 1738 and 29 in 1739.5 Although Chamberlain was subsequently 'very serviceable' to British naval officers during the war of the Austrian Succession, correspondence between Cardinal Albani and Horace Mann shows that his relations with the Pretender's household were still causing mistrust in 1744 and 1745; but in 1747 Mann received from Chamberlain a report of a plot against the Duke of Cumberland.3


By the time he went to Italy in November 1750, William Chambers had already visited India and China as a cadet with the Swedish East India Company and he had also spent a year in Paris studying architecture under J.-F. Blondel.1 He was to spend nearly five years in Rome where he came to be regarded as a 'Prodigy for Genius, for Sense & good taste'. Robert Adam, for whom Chambers was a serious rival, particularly commented on his taste 'for Bas relieves, Ornaments, & decorations of Buildings, He both knows well & draws exquisitely. His Sense is middling, but his appearance is gentell & his person good which are most material circumstances'.2 Chambers associated with the French draughtsmen Pêcheux and Clérisseau (though he was alleged to have 'behaved disgracefully' to the latter3), both artists subsequently employed by Robert Adam.  Few details are known of Chambers in Italy, but he said he had visited 'Naples, Florence, Bologna, Venice, Vicenza, Genoa, Milan, Turin, &c, collecting in all those places all that could serve me and increase my knowledge [of] the science I had chosen for my study'. In the summer of 1752 he had returned to Paris and in November he left with Catherine More, his future wife, for Florence, where they had arrived by mid-December 1752. On 14 January 1753 Chambers was elected to the Florentine Accademia del Disegno, having been introduced by Ignazio Hugford.4 Horace Mann commended him to Cardinal Albani,5 and by 10 February Chambers and Catherine More were in Rome.6 They were married there on 24 March 1753, the witnesses being the Abbé Grant, George Potter and James Oughton. They lodged thereafter in the Strada Felice, in Tomati's house (where Piranesi had a shop).7 Their daughter Cornelia was born there on 5 July 1753 and a second daughter, Selina, late in 1754/early 1755. Chambers, his wife and older daughter, together with the sculptor Joseph Wilton, left Rome for England in April 1755, leaving their younger daughter in the care of Dr and Mrs James Irwin; after Irwin's death in February 1759, Mrs Irwin brought Selina back to England in May.8 In 1773 Chambers counselled his pupil Edward Stevens to study in Italy the works of 'M. Angelo, Vignola, Peruzzi, and Palladio' with those of 'the celebrated Bernini', and he urged contact with Piranesi, who 'is full of matter, extravagant 'tis true, often absurd, but from his overflowings you may gather much information'. He later advised the students at the RA that 'Travelling to an Artist is what the University is to a Man of Letters, the last stage of a regular Education'.

He had arrived in Rome before 5 April 1749, when Cardinal Albani in Rome acknowledged Horace Mann's introduction from Florence.1 On 30 August 1750, James Russel's father told him, from London, that a 'Mr. Chamire' had confirmed the report that James Russel was to succeed Mark Parker as antiquary in Rome, adding that Chamire had bought a copy of Russel's Letters and asked to be remembered to him.2
Champernocon' exported 20 pictures from Rome in January 1790 (including 7 landscapes by Locatelli and 2 by Orizzonte),1 and was still there in April when he met the Gibbes family.2 In 1802 he had 'been abroad 3 years in Germany & Italy'.3




Chandler undertook the collation of the Pindar manuscripts in Florence and Rome, and he examined the Greek Testament manuscripts in the Vatican, where the Papal Court curtailed his opportunities for further study (DNB).
Changuion was secretary to the British envoy Sir James Gray at Naples. He was there with Gray in January 1753; he was chargé d'affaires when Gray was absent in the spring of 1755 and in March 1763, and again, briefly, after Gray's departure in October 1764 and before William Hamilton's arrival the following month.1 Hamilton then told Horace Mann on 27 November that Changuion would be leaving the following spring.2 Sir William Farington was visited by Hamilton, Changuion and Isaac Jamineau while in Naples on 24 April 1765.3  Changuion left Naples in June and Hamilton told Horace Mann on the 11th: 'I verily believe him to be an honest Man but it was impossible for us to go on together, especialy as he very soon disgusted Mrs Hamilton by his ill bred manner, & to be sure they hated one another most cordially. However I wish him well & shall rather endeavour to serve than hurt him'.4 On 2 July Changuion was said to have taken a boat from Genoa to England, accompanied by Commodore Thomas Harrison.5 In 1771 he was appointed British consul in Sicily.6 On 19 February he was writing to Hamilton from London 'I intend to set out by Paris for Marseilles about the middle of next Month to embark en droiture for Naples'.7 His appointment was shortlived, for he died at Messina on 9 November 1771.8

He was in Padua on 18 April 1702.1 He was probably the Richard Chapman who late in November 1701 had made an excursion of 'about ten days' from Leghorn to Pisa, Serravezza, Massa and Carrara with Humphrey Chetham.2

Major Chapman arrived in Siena on 7 September 1788; by 17 November he was setting out from Rome for Naples with 'Leckie'. Early the following January they both dined with Sir William Hamilton in Naples.1 On 10 April 1789 'Maggiore Ciapemene' arrived in Venice.2
Chappelow was travelling in Italy with Charles Shard. He was noticed in Rome sometime before 1 April 17861 and later that month, as they crossed the Apennines near Spoleto, they assisted Hester Piozzi and her husband, whose coach had broken down.2 They travelled slowly together to Bologna and on to Padua. On 8 May they were sailing down the Brenta to Venice with Bertie Greatheed and his wife, 'with Music, and cold Chickens, and Cyprus Wine'. Chappelow and Shard were back in London by 4 July. Chappelow became a close friend and correspondent of Mrs Piozzi.

On 8 August 1746 the 4th Earl of Chesterfield wrote his recommendation of 'a young Irish Nobleman of very good Estate who is or soon will be at the Hague'.1 Charlemont, with his tutor Edward Murphy, had set out from Dublin on 19 July.2 After a prolonged stay in The Hague, Charlemont was persuaded by Murphy to follow the advice of the 4th Earl of Sandwich and move on to Turin, where he enrolled at the Royal Academy in October 1747 for a year. He began to make plans for a Levantine voyage and was encouraged by his fellow student, the Crown Prince, Duke of Savoy. King Charles Emmanuel III granted leave to the court architect, G.B. Borra, to go to Constantinople with Charlemont the following year. While he was in Turin Charlemont met David Hume who presumed to consider himself a rival in a love affair; Charlemont thought his appearance 'far better suited to communicate the idea of a turtle-eating Alderman than of a refined philosopher'. An Irish friend, Francis Pierpoint Burton, was also at Turin with his tutor Alexander Scott, and Charlemont asked him to join his proposed expedition, offering to lend him the money to do so; they agreed to meet at Leghorn in March 1749, and meanwhile Charlemont and Murphy left Turin on 27 October 1748 for Bologna, Rome and Naples. Charlemont was one of those who 'liberally subscribed'3 to Stuart and Revett's Proposal for publishing an Accurate Description of the Antiquities of Athens [1748] and the goal of Charlemont's voyage then became Athens rather than Constantinople.  In March 1749 he heard at Leghorn that Borra had withdrawn from the expedition but the King had ordered him 'to make duplicates of all plans he took for you'.4 His expedition set sail in a chartered frigate which on 6 May reached Messina. Here Charlemont studied the effects of the plague which had ravaged the city in 1743 and compared eye-witness accounts with those of Thucydides concerning the plague of Athens.5 They met Richard Dalton in Sicily and it was agreed that he should join the expedition as draughtsman. After many adventures, which included the rediscovery of the lost site of Halicarnassus and the friezes from the Mausoleum at Bodrum, as well as viewing the antiquities of Athens ahead of Stuart, Charlemont and Murphy were back in Rome in March 1750.  Now a key figure in the developing Graeco-Roman controversy, Charlemont claimed the attention of scholars and antiquarians, Benedict XIV and the Cardinals Passionei and Albani. The doors of the Roman nobility were opened to him, but it was in the company of his fellow grand tourists that he spent his time. He and Lord Bruce of Tottenham, having little better to do, decided they were in love with Eugenia Peters. Philip Stanhope was also a frequent visitor at her lodgings, but in view of her rather doubtful background it did not occur to them that he might consider marrying her (which he did nine years later). The wedding of the Duke of Savoy intervened and when Charlemont returned from Turin Eugenia and her mother had left Rome, with Stanhope travelling in the same direction. In the summer of 1750 Charlemont made his first essays in patronage, commissioning views of Tivoli from Patch6 and giving other commissions to G.B. Maini and Simon Vierpyl. During the wet winter and spring of 1750-1, when the craze for caricatura was at its height, Charlemont appeared with Joseph Leeson junior in a drawing by P.L. Ghezzi (Philadelphia MA), in Reynolds's Parody of the School of Athens and in a musical group also by Reynolds, with Sir Thomas Kennedy, John Ward and Richard Phelps, each disporting their national emblems, Charlemont with a bunch of shamrock in his hat (both pictures NGI).7 Richard Phelps came to admire Charlemont ('few who have made so great & universal use of their travels') and he became 'sufficiently employed in being his Lordship's Amanuensis'.8 He also became the manager of Charlemont's musical and masquing society who planned a 'Grand Coup d'Eclat' for the Carnival. Phelps and Charlemont designed a Triumph of British Liberty-a three-decker car painted with emblems of the House of Hanover and drawn by four horses abreast, carrying nineteen figures in symbolic dress, among them Charlemont as Minerva presiding over the Arts and Sciences; Lord Bruce as Liberty, and Lord Middleton [Midleton], Ward and Kennedy as Patriotism, Virtue & Truth. Phelps himself played Brittania, 'because', he explained, 'I looked the jolliest of the Company'.8 The authorities, however, banned the exercise on the grounds that four horses abreast were dangerous in narrow streets. Charlemont was still in Rome on 12 April when Benjamin Lethieullier promised to pay him forty guineas if he were the first of the two to marry. That summer he made a lengthy excursion with Lord Bruce, visiting near Siena the castrato Senesino who recalled his sensational success in London and showed them round his villa and gardens which were in the English taste; 'Ecce la Providenza Inglese' he crowed, and condescended to entertain them with a song.9 They were at Lucca on 26 September, when they made a wager on the longevity of acquaintances and friends. By November 1751 Charlemont was back in Rome for the celebrations of the birth of the Dauphin given by the French ambassador, the duc de Nivernois. At Easter 1752 and 1753 Charlemont was listed as lodging in the Strada della Croce with four Italian servants, his Irish valet Barney, and one 'Gio: Bacca Inglese' and with Murphy as Major Domo.10 That April (1752) he made a wager with Sir Thomas Kennedy on a horse race to be run on the Island of Man three years later. The Academy promoted by Charlemont for the encouragement of English students of sculpture and painting was founded in Rome on 11 May 1752. A subscription had been started, pensions were to be provided for needy students, and John Parker, Charlemont's agent, was appointed the first Director. Charlemont stayed in Rome in June while his friends went off to Naples; the Marchese Gabrielli presented him with a table cut from mosaic paving which he had excavated at Hadrian's Villa.11 In the autumn Charlemont suffered the first attack of an illness which would periodically incapacitate him for the rest of his life; the duc de Nivernois visited the invalid, who had recovered by December. On 18 October 1752 he had been in Capua with John Parker, indicating a visit to Naples; he probably spent the winter there since he was again passing through Capua, this time with Edward Murphy and George Potter, on 14 June 175312 (although he had been listed as living at Rome at Easter that year, see above). Charlemont then appears to have stayed in Rome for the remainder of 1753. His patronage of artists flourished; he brought Chambers into prominence with the fashionable set; he sat to Batoni for a half-length (Clark/Bowron 190; YCBA) and a whole-length portrait (untraced), finally completed in 1756; he acquired a copy of the Medici Venus from Joseph Wilton, and from Simon Vierpyl The Fighting Gladiator, bronze busts of Brutus, Pompey and Caesar, and a sculpted frame for a relief of Venus by Guglielmo della Porta. Later, in March 1754, Charlemont was permitted to export from Rome two pictures and a number of marbles (including a copy of Homer's bust in the Farnese, and a 'rittratto di signora inglese').13 He was also buying books, medals and prints and had unspecified dealings with Borrioni, with whom he regularly fraternised. Charlemont was pleased to accept Piranesi's offer of the dedication of his Antichita Romane, then proposed as a single volume; he met the artist once and then seemed to lose interest.  In October 1753 he was again ill and he left Rome rather hurriedly in January or February 1754 in circumstances which gave rise to a rumour that he had been poisoned by a jealous woman.14 Charlemont later charged Robert Wood (who was travelling to Rome with the 3rd Duke of Bridgewater) to act as his emissary with the woman concerned.15 George Potter meanwhile wrote a whimsical letter to him at Turin from Rome (2 March 1754) declaring him 'dead', but believing he had departed 'this here world' in 'odeur de Saintete'.16 The Abbé Grant, under instructions from Charlemont, settled the debts which had hindered Potter's departure from Rome and told Charlemont that 'George will soon be beating up your Lordship's lodgings'.17 Charlemont was still at Turin in June when his stepfather, Thomas Adderley, wrote to offer him a small estate outside Dublin [later called Marino]; Charlemont accepted this gift by September and on 10 October Parker asked Luigi Vanvitelli at Caserta for designs for a 'Palazzetto abitibile' at Marino.18  Before he left he visited Vicenza and Verona. He was measuring the Villa Rotunda at Vicenza with Murphy in August,19 and it would have been at this time that he also visited the Marchese Scipione Maffei at Verona. 'I had the unmerited honour of assisting at an Academy which met there weekly under his auspices', Charlemont wrote; 'the Assembly consisted of the Principal Literati of the City, and its neighbourhood, many of whom brought with them Essays, written during the previous week, which were read to the Society'. The Marchese gave him 'a quarto edition of his Merope, together with translations of the same into French and English ... in many places corrected by his own Hand'. Travelling by way of the south of France from Nîmes to Barcelona and Bordeaux (where he visited Montesquieu at La Brede), Charlemont went to Paris and with Murphy and Potter arrived in London in January 1755. He had left in Italy several unfinished commissions, with which Murphy dealt, owing largely to Charlemont's rheumatism which at times prevented him from lifting a pen. A letter from Piranesi, complaining of Parker's conduct in Rome and seeking money, went unanswered and there were charges that Murphy had Charlemont's seal and forged his hand. Piranesi then published his letter and defaced the dedicatory plates of his Antichita Romane. Only in March 1758 did Piranesi gave a reluctant recantation to the governor of Rome.20 Charlemont's other Roman contacts were more equable: Vierpyl came to Dublin to work at Marino, where the Casino was designed by Chambers.
The livelier and more frivolous of the Pretender's two sons, Charles was brought up in Rome in the Palazzo Muti.1 In 1734 he accompanied his cousin the Duke of Liria (later 2nd Duke of Berwick) at the siege of Gaeta (an episode in the successful Spanish campaign in Naples), and showed considerable spirit. From May to June 1737 he toured Italy (as the Count of Albany), being well received in Tuscany and Venice, the two powers which openly supported the Stuart cause. He was keen on music, and in his youth was an accomplished 'cellist; with his brother Henry he performed Corelli's Notte di Natale for Charles de Brosses in 1740. His portrait was painted by Antonio David (his father's painter) in 1723 and 1726, by L.-G. Blanchet in 1738 (for the Duchess of Parma, his mother's aunt) and in 1739 (Holyrood), and by Dupra in 1740; he was drawn by Giles Hussey c.1735 (BM), and in 1737 by Rosalba Carriera in Venice and by Liotard; his father thought the Liotard a better likeness than the Rosalba.2 Batoni is said to have given him drawing lessons.3 In 1741 he visited France and in January 1744 he left Rome to lead the Jacobite rebellion in Scotland. He never saw his father again. He rode in disguise through Caprarola and Massa to Genoa, and was in Paris by February. From Paris in 1744 he asked his father to have Pompeo [Batoni] copy for him his brother's portrait by Dupra.4 After the failure of the '45 rebellion he returned to Paris. In 1748, according to the terms of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, Charles left France for the Papal city of Avignon. He may have been in Venice in 1749, but for the next fifteen years he led a wandering and dissolute existence in Europe, in the course of which he had a daughter, Charlotte, by Clementina Walkinshaw. He returned alone to Rome in January 1766 on his father's death, a decrepit figure, much given to drink. 'His person is tall, and rather lusty', an English observer wrote; 'His complexion has a redness in it not unlike the effects of drinking. He has a complaint in his legs which obliges him to wear a kind of half-boots'.5 Charles's sovereignty was not recognised by Pope Clement XIII who called him the Count of Albany and had the royal arms of England removed from the doorway of the Palazzo Muti. In 1766 Charles paraded daily through the streets of Rome accompanied by John Hay of Restalrig, with Andrew Lumisden, Captain Adam Urquhart and Stafford following in another carriage-but his passage was largely ignored.6  On 17 April 1772 he married at Macerata (near Ancona) the nineteen-year-old Princess Louise of Stolberg-Gedern who soon found him 'the most insupportable man that ever existed, a man who combined the defects and failings of all classes, as well as the vice common to lackeys, that of drink'. Pope Clement XIV denied them an audience (addressing them as Baron de Renfrew and his wife, a title Charles had used when living with Clementina Walkinshaw in France). Though Charles restrained his drinking for a year, his marriage foundered. In January 1773 Sir William Hamilton reported that Charles was 'universally looked upon as in a great degree out of his Senses, and would be deserted if a few people did not go to him out of compassion for his Wife, whom he never quits a moment'.7  In 1775 they moved to the Palazzo Corsini in Florence and in 1777 to the Palazzo Guadagni. His physical condition and behaviour grew steadily worse and in 1780 Louise, already under the spell of Count Vittorio Alfieri, left him. His 'pretty young wife has given him the slip', wrote Charles Parker; 'the poor old man is almost always asleep & has I believe but very little sense of his Misfortunes'.8 In October 1784 he was joined by his illegitimate daughter Charlotte, whom he created Duchess of Albany. She managed to reconcile Charles with his brother, the Cardinal-Duke of York, Henry Benedict, and in December 1785 Charles returned with her to the Palazzo Muti in Rome. In February 1787 he was seen during the Carnival in Rome driving in the Corso, 'lolling in his coach, the very image of a drunken Silenus, more asleep than awake'.9 He died in the Palazzo Muti on 30 January 1788, and was buried at Frascati, his brother conducting the funeral service.  Of his later portraits, Laurent Pêcheux was appointed his painter in 1773; there are portraits by him and drawings by Ozias Humphry (one dated 1776 in SNPG) showing heavy and dispirited features.10 The last portrait appears to be that by H.D. Hamilton of c.1785-8 (examples at Dundee, SNPG and NPG).

Dr George Charles 'goes along with the Earl of Rochford as Secretary to his Lordship while at Turin', wrote his friends George Campbell and David Bruce from London in June 1749.1 Charles was chargé d'affaires during Rochford's absences in 1753 and 1754, and between Rochford's final departure and the arrival of his successor, George William Hervey, 2nd Earl of Bristol, on 15 June 1755.2 He received the new envoy and accompanied him when he was presented to the King at Veneria on 16 June.3 Bristol recorded 'how much I am oblig'd to him for all the intelligence he has given me in relation to this court. The King of Sardinia, the Duke of Savoy and the Ministers here are perfectly satisfied with his conduct, and have express'd their approbation of him to me in very strong terms'.4 He was in Rome with Lord Bute in January 1769, described as 'an elderly good sort of man'.5
He was one of the surgeons to the Duke of Gloucester during his first visit to Italy. Horace Mann recorded the 'great confidence' Gloucester had in him, but as the Duke's health grew worse in Leghorn, Mann insisted on calling in 'two of the best physicians here, to which Mr Charlton ... very readily consented'. Mann later alleged that Charlton, who seems to have been assisted by Mick [or Meek], a ship's surgeon, appeared incompetent and there was mutual suspicion between him and the Italian physicians (Wal.Corr., 23:334, 336, 393).



Chase was a member of Lord Tylney's household in Florence, and there are sporadic references to him in Italy from 1773. Early in 1773 he was with his master in Naples (see Elizabeth, Duchess of Beaufort) and in June 1775 he went with Lady Orford to Fiesole.1 On 30 September 1776 Home wrote to Colin Morison from Florence introducing Mr Chase and Mr Tenant who are going to visit Rome 'to observe the different curiosities ... and mean to lodge at Pio's if his home is empty'.2 On 3 November 1779 Hippisley asked Lord Herbert to 'ask Mr Chase to lend you his account of the Earthquake at Lisbon', in which, according to Horace Walpole, Chase had been crushed in the ruins of his house.3 Chase's name occurs several times in John Ramsay's Journal: in December 1782 in Rome, in May and June 1783 in Naples, and May 1784 in Florence.4 When Lord Tylney died in Naples in September 1784 he left 'Thomas Chase Esq.' £300 in his will 'as a mark of gratitude for the great services he has shown me during his residence with me at Florence and Naples'.5 William Assheton and Dr John Parkinson met him in Naples on 27 January 1784 at a dinner given by the 5th Earl of Shaftesbury, and Assheton met both men again in Paris in November of that year.6 Chase witnessed Horace Mann's will (26 March 1781), in which he was left a mourning ring ('to my most esteemed and dear friend').7
Cheauvet/Chauvet', always listed in English company, was met several times in Italy by Sir William Farington, on the last occasion when he was confined by gout at Leghorn.1 On 5 May 1765 Chauvet was with Thomas Hickey in Capua, returning from Naples to Rome.2
In Rome Robert Adam called him 'a good natural little fellow as ever was born';1 he was in Venice in April-May 1757 with George Hill and Patrick Davison.2

Sir John Chester and his friend Burrell Massingberd became important early patrons of William Kent while he was in Italy. They were together in Leghorn in December 1711,1 and on 25 June 1712 Kent recorded that Chester had left Rome 'about 3 weeks ago'. Between 1713 and 1718 Kent made for him copies from Correggio (Leda), Domenichino (Diana and her Nymphs), Poussin (as a pendant to the Domenichino) and Maratti (Daphnis and Apollo and a Madonna).2 When Chester rebuilt Chicheley, Kent painted a ceiling piece for him in 1718-19.3



Humphrey Chetham arrived at Leghorn from 'Saphia in Barbary' on 15 November 1701 (some months after the death of his elder brother George at Leghorn),1 and he remained there as a merchant for many years (until 1712 in partnership with George Collings).2 He acted as shipping agent for William Kent in 1713-15.3 In his manuscript Journal of 1701-12 (Chetham jnl.MSS) he described several journeys made from Leghorn: to Florence in June 1705 for the public entry of the new envoy, Dr Henry Newton; to England and back in 1706, leaving Leghorn with Edward Nelthorpe on 29 May and reaching Harwich on 13 June, then leaving Harwich on 3 October and arriving back in Leghorn on 5 December, and in 1712 going with Basil Kennett to Rome, where Ficoroni was their guide, and Naples. Chetham was again in England in 1717.
John Chetwynd held two diplomatic posts at Turin during the Spanish wars: from 1704 to 1706 he acted as secretary for the English envoy Richard Hill, and from 1706 to 1713 he was himself envoy.1 For this second appointment he reached Turin from England on 29 September 1706,2 having passed through Padua on the 4th.3 He was absent in 1708 when he went to Spain between January and July and to The Hague in November,4 and he was on leave from November 1710 to May 1711. In November 1711 he welcomed his brother William on his arrival in Genoa as envoy.5 He finally left Turin on 8 September 1713.6 One of Chetwynd's letter books, beginning in January 1704, is in the Staffs. RO (D649/8/2).7
Walter Chetwynd was first in Italy in 1734-5 as tutor to George, Earl of Euston. He returned to Turin in November 1739 when he met Lord Lincoln and Horace Walpole.1 He was still there in January 1740 with John Bligh, with whom he was in Florence in July. In June 1741 he was in Chamonix with William Windham's lively crowd,2 although Horace Walpole had described Chetwynd as 'a man that never utters a syllable'.1
Chetwynd was the British resident at Genoa 1708-11 and envoy extraordinary 1711-13.1 In 1708 he was also acting in Turin as secretary to his brother John,2 through whose influence he doubtless held his own diplomatic appointments. In 1709 he is recorded as attending Orlandini's L'odio e l'amore in Genoa with Lord Finch; Chetwynd was subsequently a director of the Royal Academy of Music in London.3



Following the deaths of his father in 1759 and his mother in 1763, Josiah Child, aged little more than ten, went to Italy to live with his uncle in Florence and Naples, see 2nd Earl Tylney. Charles Townley met him in Parma with his tutor, the Abbé Pistoia, in September 1768 and they travelled together from Milan to Turin, where it appears Child was then attending the Academy.1 In Florence in November 1772 Thomas Orde described Child as 'a very handsome young Irish' pursuing the pretty marchesa de Lepin.2 But eighteen months later, on 5 July 1774, Child died in Florence from consumption and was buried in the Protestant cemetery at Leghorn.3 Horace Mann observed that he had been a great favourite with his uncle, who would now presumably 'destroy the rich codicils in favour of Joe' in his will.4

In 1721 George Cholmondeley was travelling in Italy with his governor, John Breval. In April they went from Rome to Naples with Lord March and his tutor, Thomas Hill,1 and in September they were in Padua.2 In the course of his tour Cholmondeley acquired at least a bust of Pompey,3 and he may also have acquired some of the Italian paintings which were in the Cholmondeley sale of 1777 (Christie's, 14-15 Feb.). Breval subsequently dedicated his Remarks on Several Parts of Europe [1726 ed.] to Cholmondeley (by then Lord Malpas).
On his first visit to Italy, shortly after his succession to the Earldom, Cholmondeley was, with Colonel Charles Rainsford, Major Nathaniel Heywood and a Mr Lee, equerry to the Duke of Gloucester, although his attendance was by no means constant. He sailed with the Duke from Genoa to Leghorn in October 1771.1 During the Duke's convalescence Cholmondeley visited Florence, Bologna and Venice.2 By the end of November he had rejoined the Duke in Pisa and accompanied him back to Florence (Horace Mann then said that a Mr Lee was travelling with Cholmondeley3). Cholmondeley dined with the Duke on the Trident at Leghorn on 1 and 4 December.4 Later that month he passed through Rome (Mann had given him an introduction to Cardinal Albani) on his way south; he was in Capua with Lee on 23 December and he rejoined the Duke in Naples.5 He sat to Batoni in Rome in 1772 (Clark/Bowron 343; Houghton, a replica now untraced); Horace Walpole had requested 'a head of himself [Cholmondeley] by Pompeio Battoni' the previous November.6 At the end of March 1772 Cholmondeley was again in Florence7 where he stayed through the summer, living 'almost entirely with the Great Duke [of Tuscany] and the Ladies of the Court to whose smiles he has the just pretension of spending £1200 per annum'.8  His subsequent movements in Italy are not clear and the following references probably refer to separate visits. A 'Giorgio Shomoneij' with a 'mons Offner'[?] arrived in Venice on 28 March 1775.9 Cholmondeley wrote to Sir John Dick from Trent on 24 August 1777, describing how he had sat at the bedside of the Duke of Gloucester during his illness.10 Four years later he was alleged to have pursued Mrs Armitstead from Paris to Italy where they stayed between December 1781 and February 1782, see Armitstead; later in 1782 he was seen in Rome by Charles Parker.11  Soon after his marriage he returned to Italy with his wife. A projected visit in 1791 seems not to have taken place,12 but they set out the following year. His first son, George, was born in Paris en route, and the family arrived in Venice on 29 October 1792 and left on 29 November.13 They passed the winter in Naples where his mother-in-law, the Dowager Duchess of Ancaster, was convalescing; Lady Cholmondeley gave a ball in January for their son George's first birthday14 and Cholmondeley gave another on 7 March.15 The Duchess was in Rome in April and arrived in Venice on 7 May, the day after the Cholmondeleys.16 She went on to pass the summer in Lausanne (and the Cholmondeleys may have followed). In the autumn they were all together in Naples, where on 7 October the Duchess died in the house of her daughter and son-in-law; within a month the Cholmondeleys had set off back to England.17 While in Rome Cholmondeley attracted the attention of Lady Knight who remembered him as 'a man of no character except that of a democrat'.18
George Cholmondeley was introduced to Horace Mann by Horace Walpole as 'a young man of sense and honourable principles', who had 'some humour, and some voice and is musical; but he has not good health, nor always good spirits'.1 His tour was brief. He arrived in Florence on 8 October,2 went to Naples early in November and was back in Rome by 19 November.3 On 11 December he had 'just left for England',4 and on 30 December he was in Turin, being introduced at the Court by the British envoy, John Trevor.5  In April 1788 a Cholmondeley was one of a party who went from Milan to visit the Borromean islands on Lake Maggiore.6

Cholwick was in Florence with Edward Sainthill by 24 June 1742, when John Chute told Horace Walpole that their 'very queer names and no less queer dispositions, have determined us to call them Balaam and his ass ... however, they have got somebody [the 1st Duke of Newcastle] to speak for them both to Mini [Horace Mann], and we are vastly civil to them, and Mini carries them out in the coach'.1 Cholwick was apparently Sainthill's 'ass'. On 15 July 1742 Mann called Sainthill 'vastly odd, indeed almost a driveller' adding 'I carry them tomorrow to Pratolino'.2 In May 1743 they set out from Mantua for Verona with John Maxwell and William Rouet, but on entering Veronese territory they were taken to the lazzaretto at Verona, as a precaution against plague, and not released for fourteen days (Cholwick's christian name is given as Thomas in the Veronese records).3
Following the death of his mistress Anne Oldfield, Charles Churchill made a brief tour of Italy with a Mr Bretton [Breton] and a Captain Elliott, going from Florence, via Lucca and Leghorn, to Rome.1 There Sir Thomas Dereham introduced them 'into the best company' before Churchill's recall on duty shortened their visit; 'I believe', wrote Dereham, 'that Mr Elliott will take another trip to satisfie better his curiositie, and enjoy the various diversions of the place that he relished extreamly'.2 In July Stosch devised a meeting with Cardinal Albani who presented Churchill with busts of Commodus and Septimius Severus and two alabaster vases, with which, Stosch said, Churchill was very pleased; he later gave them to Sir Robert Walpole.3 In August, Churchill and Elliott passed through Parma on their way to Milan.4 In October 1731 Stosch intimated that he would be pleased to supply Churchill with works of art.3
Churchill entered Italy via Turin and had reached Florence by mid-August 1735, when he wrote to the Earl of Essex saying he would shortly be going to Siena.1 By January 1737 Churchill had been there for sixteen months, wrote Bristow, 'faisant assés de depense, et logé dans un mauvais auberge'.2 He went to Rome in 1738, possibly with George Lewis Langton, Lancelot Allgood and Edwin Lascelles, their names appearing together on Langton's tomb in the Protestant cemetery in Rome.3 Allgood and Lascelles were in Padua in October 1738,4 but Churchill was still in Rome during the winter of 1738-9, where Samuel Crisp became one of his intimates.5 By October 1739 he was in Geneva, one of 'The Bloods' with William Windham and his set.6


Distinguished by his fan and eyeglass and 'enfeebled by a melancholy diet of milk and turnips which he adopted to avert the dreadful attacks of gout to which he was a lifelong victim',1 Chute travelled in Italy with his cousin, the deaf and largely silent Francis Whithed (who was eighteen years younger); Horace Walpole called them 'The Chutheds'. They were to spend seven years in Italy in the course of which Chute became a master of Italian.2  On 13 May 1740 Chute told his friend Puckridge that they would spend 'about a month longer' at Aix before going on to Italy.3 On 31 October 1740 they were in Siena, where they stayed until February 1741 (Chute wrote to Puckridge from Florence on 2 April 1741 'I wrote to you from Sienna as near as I can remember the 5th of February').3 By April they had met Thomas Gray and Horace Walpole in Florence and they left together on 24 April for Reggio.4 There occured the quarrel between Walpole and Gray, after which Chute and Whithed left for Venice with Gray to see the Ascension festivities on 11 May. Walpole arrived in Venice on 9 June, and was in the same lodgings as 'The Chutheds' (17:74); he later recalled how consul Joseph Smith had shown them 'a Guido after pompous rooms full of Sebastian Riccis', leading Chute to say he 'had now made amends for all the rubbish he had shown us before' (35:51). Both Chute and Whithed sat to Rosalba Carriera; her drawing of Chute, dated 10 July 1741, now hangs with her pastel of Whithed at The Vyne. Gray and Walpole had left Venice (separately) by mid-July when Chute and Whithed set off on a leisurely journey to Florence arriving on 21 August 1741 (17:97n4, 112). They stayed nearly four years, the welcome guests of Horace Mann. They were first at Monsieur Ubaldini's and then in Mann's 'sweet apartment over the river' (146). In December 1741 they made a brief trip across the Apennines to Bologna to inspect a Domenichino which Robert Walpole wished to buy; in 1744 they visited Pisa for the Festival of St Ranieri on 17 June (17:227-8, 241; 18:445), but otherwise they appear to have stayed in Florence. In June 1743 they sat for their portraits for Horace Mann (18:243). 'Tell me what you think of my living forever at Florence', Chute asked Walpole; other English travellers were 'amazed what can keep us so long here', he continued, 'they think it the dullest place they ever saw, but as the major part of them are of a taste which prefers the Venuses of the Via del Giardino to her of the Tribune ... I don't dispute with them' (35:52). Whithed meanwhile had taken a mistress, Angiola Lucchi, by whom he had a daughter, Sophia (20:237-8).  It was perhaps the death of Chute's brother in 1745 which prompted them to proceed with their tour and to leave Florence at the end of May 1745. They went via Bologna, Ravenna and Loreto to Rome 'where they propose to stay most part of the summer, and then hasten to England', wrote Mann (19:48-9). He had given them a letter of introduction to Cardinal Albani who duly 'introduced them to everybody' (59), and it was presumably then that Chute acquired through Albani and for Horace Walpole the Roman marble eagle just found in the garden of Boccapadugli (now at Gosford).5 But their stay was marred by Jacobite enthusiasm at the '45 rebellion. 'None but villains are well received there' wrote Mann, and the Jacobites rewarded their Hanoverian loyalty by 'telling everybody they were of the meanest extraction and that Mr Chute was Mr Whithed's governor' (196, 136). Unable to bear it any longer, they returned to Florence in January 1746; 'you can't think how happy I am with [them]' wrote Mann, who lodged them in his house (196). They stayed another five months, finally leaving on 26 May 1746. 'I shall never find anyone again that is so comfortable in all my épuisements', Mann told Walpole (252). By the end of May they were in Bologna, where they were presented to the Princesses Amalia and Benedetta of Modena, sisters of the Grand Duke (257). Mann said they then intended to go to Venice and Milan; by August they were in Vienna on their way home (279). Back in London in 1746 Walpole considered that Whithed 'is infinitely improved; and Mr Chute has absolutely more wit, knowledge and good nature, than, to their great surprise, ever met together in one man' (329).
Elizabeth came to Rome with her brother John Stewart of Allanbank and her sister Margaret. In March 1780 John Coxe Hippisley married Margaret in Rome, explaining to Lord Herbert that his bride was 'she whom you don't think the best Humoured, for it is not the red-haired one' (see Hippisley). By 1783 Elizabeth too was married in Italy, to the conte Cicciaporci from Pisa. In March 1783 she was staying in Venice while her husband was coming to Rome 'on business';1 he was back in Venice by 15 May 1784.2 She appears to have spent most of her time, however, in Rome, according to the observations of other travellers. In 1786 she passed on a commission to Jacob More from a Mr Stuart,3 and William Danby saw her in Rome in March 1789.4 In June 1791 her six-year-old daughter was painted by Angelica Kauffman for a Mr Spalding.5 At Rome in November 1792 Sir William Forbes met the 'daughter of our old friends Sir John and Lady Stuart of Allanbank, who brought her husband to see us, a very genteel young man of very ancient family tho' of small fortune & holding some appointment in the household of the Pope'6 (by 1807 Cicciaporci was in command of the Vatican Guard7). Forbes went on to attend her 'Sunday evening conversations' where he was introduced to Prince Augustus and Thomas Jenkins, and he last mentioned her on 17 April 1793 at a family dinner party (with the Hippisleys, a Miss Stuart and 'Monsignor Erskine').8 In May 1793 Elizabeth was staying with her sister at Gensano,9 and in January 1794 she met Sarah Bentham at a party given by Mrs Francis Canning in Rome.10 Towards the end of her life Elizabeth was in Siena where she kept 'the correspondence between her brother-in-law, Sir John Hippisley Cox, Cardinal Borgia, Lord Minto, and Cardinal York, in behalf of his Royal Highness, during his late retreat from Frascati'.11 She died in Florence on 27 January 1816, her obituary describing her as 'a lady of the Imperial Order of the Starry Cross'12 (in May 1786 she had written from Rome to Sir Robert Keith at Vienna concerning the 'Order de la Crociera'13).




Clarges was in Geneva in September 1773.1 Late in November Lady Mary Coke, on the road from Bologna to Florence, was overtaken by Clarges and a Mr Price; 'I desired them not to go faster than my equipage, as I had the greatest distrust of two of my Servants. They very civilly kept close behind my Coach, and I arrived about two o'clock on Tuesday morning at Florence'.2 Clarges was in Vienna by August and had returned to London by January 1775.3
Lady Clarges lost both her husband and father in 1782-3, and travelled in Italy as a young widow. She was in Turin by 12 October, when with Lady Hampden and others she attended a dinner given by consul John Trevor, and on the 15th she was noticed playing 'charmingly' on the harp at the Marquis del Bourg's.1 Sir William Hamilton had arrived in Turin on the 14th (on his way back to Naples from England) and he again encountered Lady Clarges in Rome; he remarked that they shared the same musical tastes, but a proposal of marriage was declined.2 By 8 January 1785 William Blackett had met Lady Clarges in Naples and he saw her again with Lady Hampden attending a Royal Grande Chasse on 5 February.3 On 29 March Lady Clarges was in Rome,4 where two days later she attended a dinner given by Thomas Jenkins.5 On 25 May Blackett observed (from Venice) that 'the whole of [the] Rome party, the Hampdens, Trevors and Lady Clarges [were] to be in Switzerland this summer'.6


Jacobus Clark Scoto-Britannus Mercator et Londinensis Senator' was in Padua on 7 August 1765, and a Mary Clark two days later.1 They were very probably the 'Mr & Mrs Clerk of London' who feature in the journal of Sir William Farington, where they are distinguished from 'Clerk of Sutton' (Godfrey Bagnall Clarke). Mr and Mrs Clerk were already in Rome when Farington arrived at the end of March 1765; they visited Naples (seeing the excavations at Pompei on 26 April and taking a boat trip on the Bay on 2 May); they had returned to Rome by 9 May and were presented to the Pope with Farington and James Boswell on the 13th; by 3 June they were in Leghorn.2 On 18 January 1766 Boswell recorded meeting 'Clarke of London' and his wife in Paris.3
Clark spent thirty years in Naples, where he practised modestly as a painter and became a much-respected cicerone and dealer. Well-read in the classics and unassuming, he lacked the cynical commercial flair of James Byres and Thomas Jenkins in Rome but, like them, he had first come to Italy to train as a painter before discovering the career of antiquarian. He wrote from London on 2 February 1768 that he was to study portrait painting in Italy for which he had been given an annual allowance of £50 by Mr Grant (James Grant of Castle Grant) and he was to leave on 'the very first ship for Leghorn'.1 Sir Ludovick Grant [James's father], Sir Hew Dalrymple and Lord Deskford [6th Earl of Findlater] were also said to have been his sponsors.2 'Mr Clerk Painter' arrived in Rome in 1768.3 In 1770 he was living in the parish of S.Nicola dei Prefetti, his age given as twenty-five.4 Soon after, probably in 1771, he moved to Naples. In August 1773 the Abbé Grant wrote that Clark, 'has been these two years past at Naples, where he [has] mett with much employment and great encouragement in his profession of painting'.5 He was presumably 'that poor Devil Clark' whom the merchant George Tierney mentioned in Naples in March 1772 as having been 'sick all the year & I could hardly get him to do anything'.6 But later that year he was well employed. On 9 June 1772 he wrote from Naples that he had sent James Grant a box with six of his paintings, copies made in Naples from Subleyras, Guercino, Titian, Cagnacci and Annibale Carracci (five of these were sold from Cullen, Christie's, 22 Sep. 1975).7 In December 1772 it was remarked in Naples that Clark 'has much credit here and paints many portraits'.8 More copies of pictures in the Royal collection in Naples were to be commissioned by William Danby in 1789-90, see William Danby. In 1773 Clark was engaged by Lord Winchilsea to accompany a party on a Mediterranean tour as far as Constantinople,5 and they set out from Naples on 1 June, see Winchilsea. By September 1778 Thomas Jones was describing him as 'Mr Clarke who served as Cicerone here [in Naples] under the Patronage of his Countryman Mr Byers the Antiquarian at Rome'9 (a subsequent coolness between Jones and Clark in 1780 probably resulted from Byres having meantime fallen out with Jones in Rome).10 In August 1779 Hippisley was recommending Clark to Lord Herbert as 'very well qualified' to be his cicerone in Naples; Clark had 'attended Mr Grant [James Grant of Sheuglie] 3 or 4 days, who presented him with 5 Guineas, which is the first money the poor man ever recieved in the capacity of a Ciceroni. His only fault is too much modesty. Mr Clarke put me in way of purchasing some select prints from Sir Wm Hamilton's book [the Campi Phlegraei].'11 Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) accepted Hippisley's advice and found Clark to be 'a very modest, good kind of man'.12 Despite his modesty, Clark made material progress and gained increasing notice. In 1778 Thomas Hardwick mentioned the fine view of Vesuvius from Clark's lodgings,13 and when Alexander Drummond, Lady Hamilton's physician, died in Naples in August 1782 he owed 'some hundred Ducats' to Clark.14 In May 1782 Sir William Hamilton described him as 'a very modest good creature & a good portrait painter'.15 In May and June 1783 he was accompanying Allan and John Ramsay,16 and in February 1788 Lord Gardenstone regretted having only just met 'Mr Clerk from our country. He has been long resident here in the profession and character of a reputable painter. He has lately taken up the business of antiquarian, is much esteemed, and appears to be a very modest, judicious and intelligent man'.17 In 1790 James Clitherow considered him to be 'a very clever, sober, quiet Man, perfectly master of his Business', whose health, however, did not then allow him to go to Vesuvius.18  In the winter of 1788 he had attended Thomas Chinnal Porter in Naples;19 three years later Clark wrote to him of his new business.20 'Since you were here I have dealt pretty considerably in Etruscan [i.e. Greek] Vases ... acknowledged by Antiquarians to be the most ancient Monuments of the Fine Arts that now exist. The Subjects represented upon some of them exhibit certain religious Rites of the ancient Greek & Egyptian Mythology, and more particularly of the Eleusinian Mysteries, which neither the Paintings of Herculaneum nor even Antique Sculpture have hitherto handed down to us'; Hamilton had spent 'upwards of £3000' on them; Clark was selling less finished examples 'as suitable decorations for Libraries, placed over the Book-Cases, or upon Brackets against the Wall'; elaborate pieces 'as elegant Ornaments for Chimney-Pieces, or upon Tables in Drawing-Rooms, Dining Rooms &c', and the smallest for 'Ladies Toilets, small Museums, &c. &c.'; he then listed some of his sales, and emphasised that his supplies were finite, since 'it is only in the ancient Sepulcral Monuments of this Kingdom that they are chiefly found'. Such interests inevitably brought him into closer contact with William Hamilton, and when the French invasion forced the envoy to leave Naples in 1798 it was Clark who saw to the packing and dispatch of his collection, and the inventory he then made ends 'Mr Clark having been confined to his house very ill for the fifteen days of this year [1800] he therefore could not supervise the packing of this [the last] case'.21 Clark is said to have died that year, and his own collection of bronzes and vases, 'formed during thirty years abroad', was dispersed in 1802 (Christie's, 9 Jun.). In his will he left a Holy Family called Sassoferrato to his native Inverness.22


Colonel Clark returned in poor health to Rome from Naples on 9 February 1783. On 20 February he gave a dinner attended by Sir George and Lady Beaumont, Lord St Asaph and others, after which 'Mrs Clarke', the Abbé Grant and John Ramsay attended the opera. On 3 March John Ramsay gave Colonel Clark a copy of his father's essay On the Right of Conquest.1 On 17 March 'Col. Clerk and his lady' left Rome for Florence with the Abbé Grant, the Colonel then described as fifty-one years old, 'a good sort of man ... father to Mrs McDonald at Newcastle, the poor man he is in a dying condition & quite exhausted & emaciated, his complaint is in his Bowels.'2 Young John Ramsay, however, said he left 'in very good spirits'.1
The following references may all refer to the same Mr and Mrs Clark[e], possibly Thomas and Anna Clarke.  'Mr Clark and his Lady, and Mrs Clark's brother' were listed in Rome on 12 December 1791.1 In September 1792 Charles Blagden described a 'fat' Mr Clarke who had 'spent last winter in Italy' and was living in Geneva 'merely to enjoy himself: thinks of spending winter in Nice'; his wife was 'a common kind of woman, very well but not striking'.2  On 27 March 1793 Sir William Forbes met in Margherita's in Rome 'Mr and Mrs Clark, whom we had never seen before, and her brother'; on 2 April he dined with 'Mr & Mrs Clark, our neighbours at Margarita's, where were Mr Firmian, brother to Mrs Clark'.3  Mrs Flaxman's journal refers to the Clarkes in Rome between June and September 1793, and the return of the Clarkes to Rome from Naples in February 1794; in March 'Clarke read Eve Prayers at Head's'.4 Flaxman wrote to Clark, probably the same, in Florence on 22 July that year,5 and A. Clarke [Anna Clarke?] was writing to Mrs Flaxman from Florence on 1 November 1794.6

Clarke was in Verona with Noel in November 1731 and is next recorded in Rome between May and June 1732.1 He had arrived in Florence by 15 July 1732, at the same time as Lord Middlesex and Lord Robert Montagu, Sewallis Shirley, James Noel, Douglas and Mr and Mrs Archer.2 All were elected to the Dilettanti Society in London in 1736, Clarke being identified as Edward Clarke in the Society's records.3 Clarke also became a member of the Masonic Lodge which Lord Middlesex founded in Florence in July 1732.4  It seems very likely that this was also the E. Clarke, 'grandson of Lady Eyles',5 who accompanied Lord Rockingham in Italy in 1733-4, and the E. Clarke who was in Italy with Lord Ashburnham in 1745 and bought an unspecified picture in Florence.6 E. Clarke and the British secretary at Venice, Sir James Gray, addressed a letter from Venice on 12 February 1745 to the Society of Dilettanti in London, promising to 'have a peculiar attention to whatever may contribute to the prosperity and welfare of the Society'.7

Clarke accompanied Thomas, Lord Berwick, and Henry Tufton to Italy and his journal and letters preserve the fullest account of their travels.1  In Rome Clarke assisted in the commissioning of works for Attingham, and told his mother that he prided himself on having kept Lord Berwick from 'meddling with antiquities, and that I have almost cured myself of all my own folly in that way, by observing the wonderful system of imposition and villany that is practised here upon poor John Bull every hour in the day. The greatest of these Romans carry cheating to such a degree of ingenuity that it becomes a science; but in baking legs, arms, and noses, they really surpass belief'; Rome, he continued, 'has been so long exhausted of every valuable relic, that it is become necessary to institute a manufactory for the fabrication of such rubbish as half the English nation come in search of every year' (132).  In Naples Clarke commented on the '40,000 lawyers', 'great part of which being half-starved', so that 'justice is a virtue unknown to the Neapolitans' (142). He described the miracle of the liquefaction of the blood of St Januarius, considering the superstition of the Neapolitans 'astonishing in an age so enlightened as the present' (158). But for Clarke, the professor of mineralogy, by far the most important activity in Naples was the study of Mount Vesuvius. He made numerous journeys up the mountain, including a most hazardous one in February 1793 to inspect the molten lava as it flowed from the cone of the volcano. He became historian and guide to the mountain for English tourists and constructed a model of Vesuvius 'upon a great scale, of the materials of the mountain, with such accuracy of outline and justness of proportion that Sir William Hamilton pronounced it to be the best ever produced of the kind, either by foreigner or native'; he also collected Greek vases, minerals and Italian marbles, both for himself and his friends (126). He gave his 'black fluted vase' to the antiquarian 'C' [presumably James Clark] to be restored and described how vitriolic acid could be used to test the authenticity of Greek vases (164-6).  In November 1793 Clarke returned briefly to England on business for Lord Berwick. While there he heard from Lord Berwick that their impending trip to Egypt and the Holy Land had been abandoned. Clarke believed 'that the change had been brought about unhandsomely or maliciously by some persons at Naples, who ... had taken advantage of his absence to poison the mind of his friend against himself', but his friendship with Lord Berwick survived. Leaving London at the end of January 1794, Clarke had returned to Naples by the beginning of March, recording from this rapid journey his impressions of Venice through which he passed during the Carnival. After only three weeks in Naples he set out for England with Lord Berwick. On this journey he remarked of the restoration of the villa of Maecenas, that the ruins were 'suffering extremely from the barbarous hands of the Pope's masons' (230). Clarke wrote some Letters on Travel during his tour, addressed to the Nobility of England, which were never published; 'roaming about the Continent, in almost proverbial apathy, becomes your characteristic', he wrote; 'Italy, exhausted by a long and successful scrutiny, is unable to supply new gratification, either in art or antiquity', but Greece and Asia Minor 'are the countries to which I would invite your attention' (246).
Clarke travelled in Italy with a Mr Jameson, and occasionally they were joined by Thomas Bigge. He had arrived in Naples by 12 March 1765.1 He was in Rome by 1 April, living with Jameson and Bigge near the Piazza di Spagna,2 where he remained until the beginning of July,3 joining the circle of Sir William Farington4 and meeting Boswell.5 On 15 May Sir William accompanied Clarke to George Willison's studio and pronounced a portrait the artist had done of Clarke 'very like, & well Painted'.6 By 8 July Clarke had reached Florence3 where Patch painted him in a caricature group (YCBA) which included Boswell. On 17 August Clarke wrote to Boswell from Milan: 'Patch has by this time encanvass'd you, and I dare say made us as ridiculous as his Genius will admit of. After all 'tis absurd enough for a Man to sit seriously down to be laugh'd at in the Copy of his figure who at the same time would cut one's throat for grinning at the original. I soon expect a letter, which, amongst other good intelligence, will bring me that of the fate of our Caricatura'.7 Clarke and Jameson went on to Milan via Pisa, Leghorn8 and Parma (where Bigge had left them). By 3 September they were in Turin, whence they travelled home via Geneva and Paris.9 On his return to England Clarke became a member of Gibbon's Roman Club.10

He was probably the Clarke who arrived in Venice on 22 March 1781.1 Thomas Clarke certainly spent time there with the British resident John Strange, to whom he subsequently addressed a number of letters describing his travels in Italy.2 By 11 May he had arrived in Florence but, he wrote, it did not live up to his expectations; he was 'lodged in a house with three bucks - we are on the best terms possible & dine together once or twice a week, but at present I am rather too old to fling chairs & tables out of the window into the Arno' and he had come to agree with Strange that there was 'no living in modern Italy without female connections'. He had planned to stay two weeks in Florence before moving on to Lucca, Pisa and Siena, where he would stay until the end of October. In Siena, Clarke's 'fellow Collegian', Steddy Grinfield [a reference which permits Clarke's identification], attempted to acquaint him with the Sienese nobility, but, wrote Clarke, 'the Men I took a mortal aversion to & for the Women, your prediction I find verified every day, viz. Italy won't do without cicisbeatura & cicisbeatura won't do for me'. He then spent nearly seven months in Rome where he arrived early in November. He had planned 'to examine all the ground for 20 miles round at least', but by 16 December he was already 'rather sick' of James Byres's detailed lessons on antiquities which he attended with Lord Jocelyn, Mr Fortescue and Mr Brooke; 'Venuti's book & a valet de place' would have done just as well; his curiosity was great enough however to wish he 'had 10,000£ to fling away on Statues etc.' Clarke made an extensive tour of the Campagna beginning on 12 April 1782 and at Corneto he saw the Etruscan grottoes which 'one day or other will be published by Mr B[yres] my Antiquarian who is really an intelligent Man, tho' a very disagreeable one'. At the end of his stay in Rome in May 1782, Clarke summed up his impressions: although he had been 'astonished with the antique statues & delighted with some of the Palaces of Modern R[ome]', he still preferred the paintings of Bologna; he had had little contact with the Italian population, 'except being now & then dragg'd to a horrid conversatione' and he suspected that 'the Romans in reality dislike the English - only less than they do the French'; he concluded, somewhat disillusioned, 'when you have seen the Thermae, the Coliseum & Pantheon, what remains?' He was to leave Rome on 24 May to spend a month or two with Thomas Jenkins at his country residence in Castel Gandolfo; he then proposed to spend three months in Naples, where he hoped Sir William Hamilton would 'do me the honour to pay some little attention to me, a thing he is not very apt to do. This is an universal Complaint'. He was still in Naples in September.3 From Naples he toured southern Italy and then travelled to Sicily and Malta, narrowly escaping from an earthquake at Messina which erupted eight days after he left; he had returned to find 'a heap of stones'. He was back in Naples by 20 May 1783 planning to spend the summer months there before returning to Rome and then Venice where he would again pay his respects to John Strange. Before leaving southern Italy he visited Sorrento and he was contemplating a journey to the Levant (Sorrento, 10 Aug. 1783).
Thomas Clarke di Londra', 'Tomaso Clorche' with his wife and son, 'Tomaso Clarche Inglese' with his wife Anna and son Richard, travelled in northern Italy in 1795-7; in 1797 they joined Hugh Cleghorn from Florence to Trieste.1 See also Mr and Mrs Clark below.

Clarke's erudite letters to the Liverpool antiquarian William Roscoe recount his travels in Italy.1 He had reached Rome by 21 November 1786 and after rambling over it 'in a most unfashionable Stile on foot', he had come to the 'general conclusion ... that the productions of modern times from the revival of the fine arts under Leo the 10th to the present day, must shrink upon a comparison with those of Greek & even of Roman fame'. The Pantheon, 'chaste & unaffectedly majestic', moved him more than St Peter's, 'which can hardly escape the epithet of meretricious'. The Campagna he found 'a dreary unjoyous tract of country'. He made a tour of Sicily in early spring 1787 and bought an edition of Theocritus at Palermo; having crossed to Calabria, he sailed up the coast to Salerno, visited Paestum and was in Naples by 15 April (825). He had returned to Rome by 10 May, having made a special expedition to Tivoli and Horace's farm at Licenza (825A). Travelling via Turin, Clarke spent the summer and autumn 1788 in Geneva, with the intention of wintering in Venice (826-8) where he was by April 1789 (829). By 6 August 1789 he was in Leghorn (830) and from September to February 1790 he lived in a rented villa at Fiesole. Learning of Roscoe's plan to write his Lorenzo de' Medici (831-3), Clarke travelled to Florence (March 1790) to collect information for him in the city libraries (834-5).2 From Florence he went north through Mantua, where he 'remained a day out of reverence to the memory of Virgil', to Milan, where he examined manuscripts of Pindar in the Ambrosian library for his friend Richard Chandler (836). He had returned to England by August 1790.






Clayton travelled in Italy before his father's death in 1725 or 1728. On 22 December 1731 Mrs Delany, staying with the Bishop in his house at St Stephen's Green, Dublin, wrote to her sister to describe the magnificent furnishings which included 'virtues, and busts and pictures that the Bishop brought with him from Italy'.1 John, Earl of Orrery, wrote from Cork in 1737: 'We have a Bishop, who, as he has travelled beyond the Alps has brought home with him, to the amazement of our mercantile fraternity, the arts and sciences that are the ornament of the European world. He eats, drinks and sleeps in taste. He has pictures by Monte Carlo, Morat, music by Corelli, castles in the air by Vitruvius'.2
Despite his official duties [Clayton] apparently spent some time studying in Italy in the early 1700s. After his return, he produced at Drury Lane on 16 January 1705 an 'opera after the Italian manner' called Arsinoe ... a setting of a translation of an Italian libretto by Stanzani, and was the first full-length opera with recitativo secco to be performed in England' (Grove).
His wife Jane died in childbirth at Leghorn on 31 October 1765.1 He appears to have acted as secretary to Sir John Dick, who was godfather to his child, who became the Rev. John Cleathing (1765-1841).2

In 1789 Dr Cleghorn, professor of history at St Andrews, was travelling in Italy with the 10th Earl of Home. Arthur Young dined with them in Florence on 22 and 23 November.1 They spent that winter in Rome,2 and arrived in Venice on 5 June 1790.3 By March 1792 a Hugh Cleghorn had 'long resided' in Switzerland, whence he occasionally proffered diplomatic advice to the government in London.4 On 10 June 1796 he was writing from Malta to Sir William Hamilton, saying that he had left Europe about a year before, being 'entrusted with the execution of a mission to India'; on 3 September he was in Siena, about to embark for Corsica.5 In January 1797 he travelled from Florence to Venice with Thomas Clarke and family, the party leaving on 1 February for Trieste.6 On 28 March 1797 Farington noted his return to England 'after an absence of 2 years. He has been overland to India'.7


Martin Clemenson and Rosa his wife were assistant and housekeeper to the painter Jacob More in Rome. In 1774 Clemenson was said to be 32, his wife 29, and his son Francis 6; in 1779 his wife was described as a widow.1 More (who died in 1793) left money to Mrs Clemenson and her son.2
Clements was in Florence in July 1753 when Dr James Tyrrell described him as 'Mr Clements, son of our Irish Treasurer, for whom Don Belloni is hard at work'.1 In Rome he sat to Batoni for an undated portrait (Clark/Bowron 174; priv. coll.). He was probably the 'Mr Clemente' passing through Capua on 20 April 1753.2 He is said to have written 'a rather dull' grand tour journal in 1754.3
Clephane's father was a Jacobite in exile after the failure of the 1715 rebellion. John joined him at Antwerp c.1725,1 but returned to Scotland after his father's death in 1727. In 1731 he was at Groningen, superintending the studies of Lord Sherard Manners and in 1731-7 he acted as tutor to his brothers, Lords Robert and Charles Manners. It was perhaps at the suggestion of John Blackwood, the Scottish-born picture dealer, that Clephane was selected as tutor to his stepson, the 2nd Lord Mansell. They set out in the summer of 1739, meeting Horace Walpole at Geneva on 2 October. In Florence G.F. Bianchi was paid 9 sequins for taking the party of three round the pictures for five days.2 After sailing from Leghorn to Naples, Mansell and Clephane reached Rome in early February 1740 and took an apartment near the Strada della Croce. Mansell commissioned a major history picture from Batoni, The Sacrifice of Iphigenia (Wemyss Collection, on loan to NGS), before his departure for Venice, where the party attended the Ascension Day celebrations. Within a few months of his return to England, Clephane set out on a similar tour, as tutor to John Bouverie, whose subsequent career as a collector may have been influenced by his encouragement. Before leaving with Bouverie and his companions on 1 October, Clephane received commissions from Blackwood, Mansell and Lord Duncannon. While in Provence en route for Italy Clephane corresponded about these with Blackwood and Duncannon, writing to Mark Parker about a picture by Imperiali and to Richard Dalton. The party stayed in Florence from June until October, living in Horace Mann's 'little house': the Ambassador thought Bouverie and his friends 'the most silent creatures' he 'ever saw', but was called on by Clephane 'some times'.3 While at Florence Clephane learnt from Blackwood of Sir Jacob Bouverie's acquisition of the Gerini Poussins (London and Melbourne), and corresponded with consul Joseph Smith at Venice: after his departure Ignazio Hugford acted as intermediary to purchase a picture which Clephane had seen at Rossi's in Florence, Carlo Dolci's Saint Cecilia, and was evidently intended for Blackwood.4 Bouverie's party was based in Rome from late October 1741 until late February 1742, and then went on to Naples, returning to Rome by late March. On 10 February Clephane bought Veronese's Mars and Venus (probably SNG no.339), previously in the Altieri collection, for Blackwood (300 crowns); on the 16th he made payments for Mansell to Panini and Imperiali's widow (150 and 100 scudi); and on 23 March he paid Batoni 30 crowns for the Sacrifice of Iphigenia. On the 24th his letter book records a letter to Blackwood with a 'sketch of ye Rubens at Naples'. He was in touch with Allan Ramsay, and buying bronzes for William Bristow, who asked him to visit the sculptor Joseph Canarte in Naples. Clephane was also enlisted as an intermediary by Mann in negotiations for a sculpture ordered from Filippo della Valle by Walpole. After leaving Rome, Clephane received a series of letters from Pierre Berton, whom he had asked to oversee the Batoni commission (and also to act as intermediary with Agostino Masucci, who was to complete Imperiali's unfinished Vetturia and Volumnia before Coriolanus, which Blackwood had ordered for Sir Gregory Page). The first of Berton's letters reached Clephane at Bologna on 10 May. The party was in Paris by early June. After Clephane's return to England he received a letter of 13 July from Batoni and further letters from Berton. Clephane was with Lord Mansell at Margam in August when he was asked by the Earl of Mountrath, at his host's uncle Bussy Mansell's suggestion, to act as tutor to his son Lord Coote (later 7th Earl of Mountrath).  Coote cannot have been a congenial charge. His father had already warned Clephane: 'I am sorry to say Ld Coote requires more looking after than lyes in my power'. The two set off in October 1742, Clephane keeping full acounts of expenditure until January 17455 and drafts of his reports to Mountrath. They wintered between Geneva and Lyons, where Clephane received letters from Blackwood which cast further light on previous commissions.  Coote and Clephane reached Florence in July 1744 and were at Rome by 24 October. There they associated with others on the tour of Italy: Joseph Leeson placed an order for a 'Dresden snuff box' with Clephane, while James Dawkins asked him to order a set of the Seasons from Rosalba Carriera.6 Further commissions were communicated in a letter of 13 November from Blackwood, including a dozen busts for the Hon. John Stanhope, and tables, statuary and a picture for Sir Gregory Page.7 Stanhope's busts were ordered from Pietro Cipriani in Florence, where Mann acted for Clephane, and in turn asked him to assist Gabriel Mathias who wished to study under Batoni. In January 1745 Clephane ordered, presumably for a client, two marines from Vernet, which would be ready by 1 January 1746. Letters from James Howe at Leghorn document other transactions: on 22 February 1745 an unspecified picture was received from Hugford at the cost of £108 8s. 8d., and on 1 March bronzes ordered by Lord Duncannon are mentioned.8 Coote and Clephane had some difficulty in securing passports to proceed to Naples and Cardinals Valenti and Albani were instrumental in securing the necessary documents on 13 March.  After his return to England, Clephane concentrated on his medical career. He was to have a place in the close-knit coterie of Scots in London, being an acquaintance of Lord Bute and a friend and correspondent of David Hume. On 12 July 1753 he received a letter from Robert Wood, asking him to commission a French translation of his account of the discoveries he and Dawkins had made at Palmyra and Baalbec.9
1. Tayler 1938, 46, 181. 2. Tayler 1939, 57 (3 Jul. 1719). 3. Tayler 1938, 181 (5 Oct. 1719). 4. HMC Stuart, 5:603. 5. AVR SA, S.Lorenzo in Lucina.
Sir John Clerk of Penicuik, the distinguished patron of arts and letters who had himself dabbled in painting in the circle of Carlo Maratti when in Rome on his own grand tour in 1697-8, paid for a long painter's training for his ne'er-do-well half-brother, Alexander.1 In Edinburgh Alexander Clerk had studied under John Alexander (a pupil of Imperiali), and in London he had taken lessons with Arthur Pond and Hans Hysing. It was with Imperiali that he placed himself when he arrived in Rome in January 1737; he boarded with one Michaele Lopez Rosa. Clerk wrote to his half-brother: 'I am with Signior Imperiale, who is reckoned the best here, but I do not quite like his pictures. I agree with your good taste in thinking his pictures lookes pale at a little distance. But since there is no other so good I must be content. I have got in to draw at the French academy as a great favour. I go every night and I shall endeavour to lose no time in this place.'2 On 9 May and 20 August 1737 he attended meetings of the Jacobite Lodge in Rome.3  The baronet's faith in his half-brother's abilities was sadly misplaced, as he came to realise when Alexander Clerk's ambitious Roman training came to little. Clerk eked out a living in London and Richmond, Yorkshire, permanently discontented and in debt, and with conspicuous lack of success in his 'precarious gimcrack business'.
Clerk's father, the second baronet of Penicuik, had made a grand tour at the end of the seventeenth century (he had been in Rome in 1697-8) and was a collector and antiquarian of considerable repute. With his father's experiences to emulate, James Clerk set off for Italy ostensibly to continue his law studies which he had begun in Edinburgh and had continued in Holland. But, unlike his father, James had little aptitude and less inclination for the law.  From Pisa Clerk confessed to his father that there was 'no employment so entirely disagreeable to [him] as that of Advocate', and revealed much in the comment that he had really come to Italy to see 'some of the best things in the way of Virtu'. He had found no law worth studying in Florence, and Pisa was 'one of the poorest places in the world'. He therefore pressed on to Rome, where his activities led his father-tolerant of his son's preference for culture rather than practical skills, perhaps because he saw in them a reflection of his own inclinations thirty-five years before-to come to terms with James's vocation in life. Sir John told the antiquary Roger Gale in 1733 that when James returned to London he hoped Gale would find him 'a greater virtuoso than his father'. Clerk had already had some art training in Edinburgh and in London, where the antiquary Alexander Gordon had described him as 'intirely wrapt up in virtuosoship'. Sir John admitted that the young man had 'no ordinary skill both in painting and drawing'. Now, in Rome, Clerk attached himself to the circle and studio of Imperiali. There is, however, no firm evidence that Clerk took formal training from Imperiali. He certainly kept company with William Mosman, a Scottish pupil of the master, whom Sir John Clerk had earlier assisted. Sir John had bought his first Imperiali in 1723. Even before he left for Italy James Clerk had begun to buy pictures for his father, and in Rome he was largely entrusted with the development of the Clerk collection along the lines set by Sir John. An account of June 1734 shows that Clerk had spent £186 on art and music in Rome, but that he had chosen to live much more cheaply than most English or Scottish visitors, and so had been able to avoid their company. This last intelligence would have gone some way to comfort Sir John, who always feared the expense to the family and loss of time to his son that a tendency to wander on the Continent might bring. But James Clerk was in fact to remain abroad for some further years, and was to travel in Holland and Germany several times in the 1740s. There his picture-buying continued. In Rome Clerk developed those interests which accounted for his greatest celebrity as Scotland's leading amateur architect of the 1760s and 1770s. Their principal monument is the new Penicuik House, built to his own design, with its chimneypieces and statuary shipped from Italy and with its interior decorative schemes painted by Alexander Runciman, the most distinguished of Clerk's artistic protégés. A remarkable Pantheon library, evocative of what Rome had meant to two generations of the Clerk family, was never built.2
A sensible, blythsom Lad', Captain Clerk was in Bordeaux in December 17681 and had sailed in May 1769 from Marseilles to Smyrna, where the plague led him to return to Leghorn in September. After a forty-day period of quarantine he went to Rome. Writing to his uncle John Clerk of Eldin 'In the care of Mr Byers Architect' on 8 November, Clerk complained that after living like a Prince in France he found Rome 'the most extravagant place I ever was in', but he felt nonetheless 'oblidged to see every Thing, and I think more so to go into Company and see the Manners of the People which I think is the first business of a traveller'; he wanted to 'make purchases in the Virtuosi way', but everything worth buying was dear and, he added, 'it would astonish you to see what Trash Antiquries picture sellers &c Palm upon the gaping English for most enormous prices'; he wanted Sir James Clerk of Penicuik to 'give me a commission to buy Piranusisi [Piranesi] works, which are things of merit, I cannot Attempt them'; he thought the most promising Scots painter at Rome the author of 'a Very Bad composition at Glasgow the Battle of Chivy Chace'; his cousin Anne Forbes (who was in Rome with her mother Margaret), was soon 'to make an essay upon my Snout'. Margaret Forbes confirmed the portrait had been started by 25 December and said that Clerk 'goes to Naples ten days hence'; meanwhile she found him 'quite the life of this city, the indwellers as well as the forestieri are delighted with him'.2  He was back in Rome by 30 March when he wrote again at some length to his uncle. 'At present I have no time to draw being occupied All Day in Visitting Antiquitys Statues &c - and have hardly time to Study Italian in which I have made some small Progress and Also my Fiddle is not so Mistund as formerly'; after seeing 'the Apollo of the Belvidera Most of the other Statues seem to have been Carvd by Sandy Thompson or some such Artist'; Anne Forbes had finished his portrait 'which has surpassd my Expectations. I don't think there is any Painter at present in Rome that could have colourd it better and most folks say it is very like but that I cannot so properly judge'; he was 'sorry Sr James is so Poor if he cannot Afford to buy Pirenise's Works'; he would stay 'in Room to see the Mummery and to hear the Musick of the Holy Week by which I think I shall be heartyly tired of functions and nonsense after which I sett out for venice by the way of Loretto & Bologna'; his 'German Expedition is at Present a little dubious'.
Mr Fletcher, Lord Justice Clerk's eldest son, Mr [William?] Cunningham, & Mr Crosbie, officers in his Majesty's Troops at Mahon are lately arrived here from Rome' (SP 93/11; Allen, 26 Jul. 1746).


Like his father, Lord Clermont was devoted to the cause of James II. In the summer of 1702 he became a Catholic convert on recovering from a severe illness in Bologna, an event which led also to his father's conversion.1 He was later in Italy in 1717 as a member of the Pretender's household; Lord Clermont arrived in Venice from Florence in March 1717,2 was in Loreto in June,3 and was listed in Italy in December 1717.4

The sisters Matilda and Selina Clevland were travelling in Italy in 1777 with their cousin, a young Swiss nobleman, Louis-François, Baron Guiger de Pragens [Prangins] (whom Matilda subsequently married) and his mother Mme Guiger. They had called on Voltaire at Ferney in 1776.1 In Florence between 16 April and 3 May Matilda was sitting to Zoffany, the portrait (priv. coll., USA) commissioned by Selina2 who, by September, had married the fifty-year-old diplomat and dealer John Udny, then British consul elect at Leghorn.

A son of Lord Clifford an agreeable man enough & a most rigid Roman Catholic' [either Hugh or his younger brother Charles, (1759-1831), who succeeded him as 6th Baron] was in Italy with Charles Belasyse in 1777. See Charles Belasyse. Hugh, 5th Baron Clifford, was in Italy in 1787-8. He was in Venice in July 1787;1 'Lord de Clifford' was in Milan in April 1788,2 and 'Lord Clifford' was again in Venice by 2 May 1788.3  He returned in 1790-2 to spend his last years in Italy tormented by gout. He was in Venice with his wife in September 1790.4 They arrived in Rome in November 1790 and he had an altar installed in his apartment at which a Mr Smelt officiated on Sundays and Holy Days.5 On 18 April 1791 the Cliffords entertained Mrs John Villiers, Sir Richard Colt Hoare, a Mr Bell and Gerald Wellesley, Lady Clifford afterwards taking Mrs Villiers to a concert given by Prince Camille de Rohan.6 In May Lady Clifford sat to Robert Fagan in Rome for a full-length portrait (priv. coll.).7 It was finished by November and well liked; Lady Clifford seemed 'disposed to do all in her power to advance [Fagan's] interest', particularly recommending him to Mrs Villiers.8 The Cliffords meanwhile had visited Ischia in April, Castel Gandolfo (where they stayed with Thomas Jenkins) in June, and Naples from June to October 1791.9 In November they returned to Rome where Lord Clifford made his will in June 1792. He died in Munich the following January.

Clifford was in Rome on 12 December 1789; he visited Father Thorpe and travelled from Rome towards Loreto with a Mr Dormer on 24 April 1790.1 They were in Venice from 8 to 15 May.2 Father Thorpe wrote of Mr and Miss Clifford being in Rome, and having connections with the Giustiniani family which would 'entitle them to every respect from Cardl. Zelada.'3
Mr Clifford my Lord Cliffords son was here about 10 ds & is since departed for Rome' (SP 93/3; Fleetwood, 31 Jan. 1713).

Captain of the Colchester, he visited Florence with Lt. Leigh early in March 1725. The Florentine Court being then in mourning for the King of Spain and Clinton having no mourning dress, he could not be presented. He was again in Florence in mid-July 1726. On each occasion he came to Florence from Leghorn (SP 98/25; Colman, 2 Mar. 1725, 13 Jul. 1726).

The journal of his tour (Clitherow jnl.MSS) is prefaced by the observation that every parent is to judge for his child: 'some prefer sending them abroad at an early Age with a tutor, others leave their Sons to themselves when they are able to shift and make their own observations: This latter plan I am fully convinced is the most eligible, and I am thoroughly sensible of the Advantage from having left England totally my own Master'. He was in France and Switzerland before entering Italy in October 1789. In Turin he heard that his friend Lascelles was in Geneva and he recrossed Mont Cenis to fetch him, returning immediately. From Turin they travelled through Milan and Bologna before arriving on 17 December in Florence where they stayed at Charles Hadfield's former establishment, 'ye best hotel in Italy'. For the next few weeks they saw the sights of Florence, Clitherow armed with La description de la Galerie Royale de Florence. He was delighted by the sight of the Cascine where he and Lascelles gave their farewell dinner party on 18 January. Proceeding via Siena, they arrived in Rome on 21 January 1790. Though they stayed only a week, they discovered 'several acquaintance and a great deal of Gaiety', attending an English ball or two and a conversazione given by Cardinal de Bernis. At Naples they were guided by the antiquary James Clark; they dined with Sir William Hamilton, visited Philipp Hackert's studio and watched a royal boar hunt - the boars being only tame pigs, and the sport of killing them 'by far the most cruel and unmanly amusement I ever was at'. They arrived back at Rome for the last three days of the Carnival and, when these were over, embarked on a strenuous six-week course of antiquities with James Byres. The only artist Clitherow records visiting was Canova, who was working on his monument to Clement XIII. They left Rome on 7 April, 'not a little glad to quit a Town where we had spent two Months, if I may be allowed to speak the truth, rather stupidly'.  Clitherow admitted that 'the satisfaction of having seen Rome' was very great but wished that 'the inhabitants were a little more civilised and ye Society upon a better footing'. They travelled on the Terni-Spoleto road to Florence; Terni alone, thought Clitherow, 'if there was no other Beauty to Attract the traveller, would in my own Opinion be sufficient recompense for the amazing Jolting and Jumbling he must go through'. In Florence Clitherow seems to have spent his time at the Villa di Petraia, admiring the view and the two beautiful Irish sisters to whom the Grand Duke had lent the villa for the summer. He also made two excursions to Leghorn (one with Lord Titchfield, Lascelles and Henry Clavering, the other with Mr and Mrs Sullivan). Lascelles was dining with Elizabeth Gibbes in Florence on 22 May.1 From Florence they went to Ferrara where they left their horses while they went by water to Venice and Padua. They left Italy through Verona, Brescia and Milan, taking the St Gothard pass to Lucerne.
Clive spent two years studying in Geneva from July 1773,1 but does not appear to have visited Italy until the winter of 1782, when he was among Allan Ramsay's acquaintances in Rome. In March 1783 he made an expedition to Terracina with James Byres, who became his friend.2 He had left Rome for England by the second week of May, Thomas Jenkins writing on 10 May 1783 that Lord Clive 'is gone strait for England, leaving Venice & Naples for a second jaunt'.3 He returned to Italy for a short visit with his sister Charlotte (1762-95) in 1787. 'Lord and Lady Clive, his sister' were in Rome in February 17874 and both sat to Angelica Kauffman in April.5 Clive particularly favoured the artist Charles Grignion, whom he frequently took with him in his own carriage;6 on 5 April they were said to have 'gone some time since to Florence'.7 Clive commissioned from him a portrait of his sister Charlotte (Powis Castle; dated Rome 1787) and an ambitious history piece, Prometheus chained to the Rocks which remained unfinished. Two drawings Grignion made for him, the Coltellata and the Salterello were engraved by Soiron. On 28 March Lord and Lady Clive (sic) were said to be returning to England with Byres (who was in England by 4 July); they had left Rome together on 22 April 1787.8  He returned to Italy with his family in 1788. 'Lord Clive's family are still here' in Rome, Byres wrote on 10 May 1788.9 There are pastel portraits by H.D. Hamilton at Powis Court of Lord and Lady Clive and of Charlotte, Margaret (d. 1814) and Robert Clive (1769-1833), Clive's sisters and brother; Byres had copies of these portraits in Rome; Lady Clive, Charlotte and Robert appear in Byres's accounts (their debts settled by 1 December 1790).10 Further portraits by Hamilton at Powis Castle of John Probert, Clive's estate agent, and Sir Henry Strachey, his father's secretary, suggest they may also have been in Clive's party in Italy. It is not clear how the party returned to England, but Robert Clive alone proposed to leave Rome in the first week of May 1790 with Byres and Christopher Norton,11 and the three were in Venice in June 1790.12  In the course of his tours, Lord Clive met the Florentine artist Anna Tonelli, who came to England and lived with Clive's family from 1794 to 1802, teaching drawing.13
Clive of India visited Italy in the last year of his life, when he was suffering from nervous depression and physical pain. He sought both a kinder climate and an opportunity to increase his collection of pictures, and he travelled with Thomas Kelsall and Anselm Beaumont, colleagues from India, with William Patoun as his artistic adviser.1 He spent two days in Milan and four in Florence,2 where Zoffany met him and sarcastically remarked that Clive would have liked to have 'a picture similar to what I am now painting of the Tribuna, but poor man, he could not go to the expense'.3 Clive arrived in Rome in January 1774; in the few days he passed there before proceeding to Naples, he spent £500 with Thomas Jenkins4 on an Assumption by Tintoretto (sold in 1929).5 The climate of Naples did not benefit him as he had hoped, and after little more than a month he returned to Rome late in February. William Hamilton wondered whether any climate could help him, observing that Clive's disorder seemed 'to be mostly of the spirits'.6  On his return to Rome, Clive stayed in the Casa Guarnieri.7 He declared 'he would only purchase the works of the Old Masters, and leave his son to encourage the moderns', and only Jenkins, who had been 'busy polishing up his virtu to engage him on his return', benefitted from his attention. According to Father Thorpe, Jenkins received £1500 for a picture by Sassoferrato not worth £500, a deal which was seen by some as repayment for the magnificent manner in which he had introduced Clive to the Pope. Matthew Peters was commissioned to copy Barocci's Madonna della Scudella,8 but that appears to have been the limit of his patronage. Gavin Hamilton succeeded in selling him an antique statue of a boy with a bird which he had recently excavated at Monte Cagnolo.9 By the end of April Clive had 'gone off & bilked the dealers', as Father Thorpe expressed it. A few months after returning to England he took his own life. Some of his Roman purchases were sold in 1778 (Christie's, 13-14 Feb.).



COBLEY; Irish, merchant in Naples.With the musician Stephen Storace and the painter John Warwick Smith, Cobley was touring around Naples in the autumn of 1778; they met Thomas Jones at Pozzuoli on 14 November and at Sorrento on the 17th.1 'Mr Cobley, a young man who was in a mercantile house in Naples' was a lively companion for the young Irish singer Michael Kelly in Naples in 1779-80.2
The arrival in Rome of 'Mr Cockran Scotch' with Mr Moor was reported on 8 January 1728;1 this was probably the Alexander Cochran who was in Padua on 10 August 1728.2
William Cochran went to Italy 'about the end of 1761' and studied there 'for five years, mostly at Rome, under the celebrated Mr Gavin Hamilton'.1 His expenses for a two-year period of study in Italy were apparently borne by the Foulis Academy,2 although it has also been said that his trip was arranged by the Hon. Charles Yorke.3 Cochran attended the Accademia del Nudo at Rome and his Italian history paintings included a Daedalus and Icarus and a Diana and Endymion.4 He was conceivably the 'Monzu Crouen-Inglese-Pittore-eretico-60', living in the Strada Felice in 17635 and the 'Cavian-Pittore-Inglese-eretico' living in the Isola del Tesoro in 1764 with Gavin Hamilton, John Day and 'Casson'.5

Cochrane was sent to Leghorn in 1794 for the Corsican campaign, and was based there until May 1796. His diary (Cochrane jnl.MSS, which begins in 1787) records his arrival in March 1794. After the Corsican campaign he returned to Italy. He listed people he met at Pisa on 7 January 1795, and mentioned visits to Padua, Bologna, Vicenza and Venice in 1796. According to the Venetian records he travelled from Verona through Vicenza to Padua on the same day, 24 April 1796 (ASV IS 777, 783).

Having served as an ensign in Gibraltar, Cockburn sailed to Leghorn at the end of 1782. His Italian itinerary is contained in his papers preserved in the National Army Museum, London.1 He was in Rome in January 1783 when he met John Ramsay, Henry Blundell and Slaney,2 and he sat to H.D. Hamilton (London art market 1987). On 15 February he dined with General Acton in Naples. In April he was presented at Court in Turin with the Marchese Orsini.3  Later, in 1810, as a major-general, he was in Sicily with the army of occupation, an experience he described in A Voyage to Cadiz and Gibraltar... and an Excursion to Portugal [1815]. He returned to Italy in 1824-5, when he acquired a number of classical marbles and vases, many of which are now in the Classical Museum of University College, Dublin.4

Patrick Cockburn, 'a Scotch Painter', was employed by the 3rd Duke of Beaufort to buy pictures, 'and they say has layd out to the value of Six Thousand Pound Sterling therein at Rome'; Cockburn arrived in Naples from Rome with the duke,1 and he was at Padua in the Duke's retinue on 28 March 1727.2 See Henry, 3rd Duke of Beaufort.
Cockburne, 'a Scotch gentleman and a discreet and trusty officer', was sent in August 1717 by the Pretender from Urbino to Bologna. Though called Captain Cockburne in August 1717 it seems he was the Major John Cockburne who was at Bologna until December, watching over Lord Peterborough (and obtaining the score of the opera Metope for the Earl of Mar).1 He was an associate of Lord Linlithgow, and his visit to Rimini from Urbino in March 1718 delayed Lord Linlithgow's own departure to Rome.2 Once in Rome Cockburne, Linlithgow and a group of other Jacobites had their dinner 'made ready by their Urbino cook at Lord Kilsyth's lodgings'.3


Sir William and Colonel [James] Moyser (for whom, see Hugh Bethel) dined at Horace Mann's house 'three days together' in May 1742 (Wal.Corr., 17:408).

Coffin was in Venice for the Carnival,1 and went on to Padua with Richard Reynell.2

Edward Coke travelled to Italy with his younger brother Robert and Sir John Buckworth. The brothers parted in January 1730. Edward left for the Carnival in Venice with Buckworth, remaining there for the Opera season at Piacenza,1 while Robert stayed six months in Rome, finally leaving for England early in July 1730.2
Edward Coke ('a very pretty young gentleman') was accompanied by a tutor George Shelvocke the younger ('a rough air and a rougher voice').1 At Turin Coke obtained permission for Arthur Villettes, secretary to the British envoy, to accompany them to the Carnival at Venice, where Coke sat to Rosalba Carriera (Holkham).2 The three visited Padua on 23 May 1739.3 Coke and his tutor were at Siena in mid-November, dining daily at Lady Pomfret's, and leaving for Rome on 17 November.4 At Rome Coke was seen courting 'la zitella Borghese' [Princess Eleanora Borghese, who m. Prince Francavilla in 1740], de Brosses observing that the 3rd Earl of Stafford 'et le petit Cook font sans cesse la roue autour d'elle'.5 June to August 1740 were spent in Florence, Coke resuming his friendship with Lady Pomfret who thought him 'one of the few that I have met with, who ought to have been sent abroad'.6 Coke left Florence for Bologna on 7 August, crossing the Appenines with Horace Walpole.7 For his widow, see Lady Mary Coke.

Two years after going to Oxford Coke set out for the Continent with his tutor J.L. Pasteur. They visited Rome, Naples and Venice and returned through Vienna, Flanders and Paris.1 In Rome Coke sat to Antonio David, the portrait dated 1735 (priv. coll.).
Lady Mary Coke, 'a dainty widow',1 had become highly strung, suspicious and a little unstable by 1773 when she went abroad. She had a 'frenzy for royalty' and a particular admiration for Maria Theresa, but the coolness with which the Empress had treated her in Vienna in 1773, combined with a series of difficulties on the road from Vienna to Italy, convinced her that she had fallen victim to a plot, which she described in her Journal (a series of regular letters addressed to either Lady Dalkeith or Lady Strafford).2 She did not enjoy herself in Italy; apart from the troubles 'the Empress has prepared me in almost every place', she was harrassed by her servants and was constantly apprehensive of meeting the Duke of Cumberland, of whom she heartily disapproved. Venice in November was wet, the gondolas were 'like so many Hearses' and 'the perpetual tolling of the Bells' was terrible. The pictures she saw were 'all damag'd, and several quite spoiled ... the damps here must be very great, and nothing is so destructive to painting'. She found the insides of Palladio's palaces 'so little corresponding with the buildings, which are so beautiful; the rooms ill distributed; no proportions regarded. Only a cast of the statue of Agrippina receiving the news of her Son's death seems to have pleased her. For ten days she sailed down the Po, 'the dirtiest and dullest River of all that I am acquainted with' to Parma. There the Correggios were 'very much hurt' and the country 'exceedingly disagreeable', but the Duke of Parma's children were charming. She admired the pictures in Bologna, but the palaces were dark principally because the windows were 'extremly small and the glass very bad'. She arrived in Florence on 30 November to stay for two months. The weather continued wet and cold, the Grand Duke and Duchess treated her coolly, but Horace Mann seemed 'very amiable', though in fact he was much exercised by 'the height and violence of her temper'. She was convinced Lord Huntingdon was persecuting her, and after a month she decided that it was impossible 'for anybody, who had not been brought up in [Italy], to think it agreeable. The Women have no education ... I cannot imagine how Lord Cowper can be so attach'd to this Country'. She visited the Tribuna and wanted the statues to be placed on black marble, instead of gilt pedestals. She left Florence with relief, being convinced that she was there 'under the continual persecution of the most cruel, unjust, & malicious enemies'. She travelled overland to Lerici and thence sailed to Genoa. 'I prefer this Town to all I have yet seen in Italy', she wrote, but when she reached Turin soon after she found that city 'tho small is so well built that I prefer it to all the others' [305]. The ballet at Turin was good, she was well received at Court, and the Van Dycks and Guido Renis in the Royal Palace were in 'perfect conservation'. Early in April she crossed Mont Cenis in snow and a high wind, causing her to reflect that she had 'never yet been fortunate in any circumstance of my life' [328].

He grows tall, is plump, and looks fresh and vigorous', wrote his guardian in 1711; 'his passions are strong and violent, and should be early regulated, civilised and softened'.1 The following year, at the age of fifteen, Thomas Coke embarked on a comprehensive tour of Europe, in the course of which his interests in painting, sculpture, rare books, manuscripts and architecture grew rapidly; Dr Thomas Hobart was his tutor and Edward Jarret his valet.2 Jarret's account books at Holkham remain the most detailed of any British traveller's expenses in Italy in the eighteenth century and also furnish a detailed itinerary.3 Already Coke could write from Rome (24 May 1714), aged sixteen, that he had become 'a perfect virtuoso, and a great lover of pictures'. He had bought four small Pietro da Cortonas, commissioned a painting from Andrea Procaccini, (presumably the Tarquin and Lucretia at Holkham) and had sat to John Alexander, the Scot (1 Jun. 1714); his expenditure in Rome on pictures, mostly unspecified, amounted to some 4,500 pauls. He began his long association with William Kent, with whom he left Rome on 6 June 1714 travelling up through Florence (where a payment was made to 'Signr fogini the statuary'), Bologna and Padua to arrive in Venice on 22 July. There Coke sat to Rosalba Carriera (payment on 17 August; the portrait now untraced); there were also payments to Henry Trench, the history painter, on 9 and 24 August 1714, and Kent was paid 750 livres for pictures he had bought. On 8 August there was an excursion to Padua where Kent left Coke and set off for Parma. Hobart and Coke went in a leisurely fashion through Vicenza, Verona, Mantua, Modena and Parma, to Turin where they arrived on 3 December. The thought of entering the Academy unsettled Coke. He did not like it, the manner of riding was poor, though the fencing master was 'the only one that is tolerable here', but, he wrote, 'I have bought several of the most valuable authors that have writ in Italian or about the country' and he reflected that 'certainly one of the greatest ornaments to a gentleman or his family is a fine Library' (3 Jan. 1715). He attended the Academy until April 1715.  For the remainder of the year he was in Switzerland, Germany and France, but he wished to spend 'one more winter in Italy, to confirm myself in the language and the virtuosoship of that Country'. In December 1715 he sailed from Marseilles to Palermo, to find Sicily preparing for war with the Turks; in March 1716 he was in Malta. The next month he was back on the Italian mainland in Naples. In Naples Coke commissioned two pictures from Solimena and he again met Kent who had also been buying pictures and drawings for him (Coke paid for Kent's lodgings in Naples). They travelled together to Rome where Luigi Garzi was commissioned to paint a Cincinnatus (1 July) and Tomasso Chiari a Sophonisba and Massimissa (15 July); he bought a view of the Colosseum by Vanvitelli on 17 July (he acquired seven Italian views by him in all), and 'a book of the drawings of Rafael' on 29 August. Sebastiano Conca, to whom payments were made in 1716 and 1717, was commissioned to paint the huge Vision of Aeneas in the Elysian Fields, in which Coke appears as Virgil with a lyre. 'Signor Giacomo', the architecture master took Coke to see Vignola's Caprarola palace. On 11 September, just before he left, he paid 65 crowns for 'a Bust of Luci Verius and for a basso', his first recorded purchases of sculpture - and on the same day he paid for silver bowls to be presented to the painters Vanvitelli and Luti (with whom he had the closest dealings). The Lucius Antonius, and a Diana which Coke bought from the Casa Consiglieri, were two of the finest pieces of classical sculpture to leave Rome in the eighteenth century, and it was alleged that Coke was briefly imprisoned for having exported the Diana.4 Coke began to pay Biscioni, Prefect of the Laurentian Library, for 'ye Collation of manuscripts and drawings of Antiquitys and for ye edition of Livy', and Kent was paid for more drawings he had bought.  The remainder of the year was passed in northern Italy. On 1 January 1717 they set out from Bologna to spend the next three months in Rome. 'Sigr Cuc, Sigr Dr Ruberti maggiordomo, Monsu Giaret Camre' stayed in rooms near the Piazza di Spagna.5 Coke sat to Francesco Trevisani (Holkham), and Trench was paid 'on Account of his Drawing'. 'Signor Giacomo' was paid for 'the plans of the palace of Farnese' and for 'teaching my master Architect[ure]' on 15 March.  It was now apparent that Coke intended to build on a grand scale on his return to England. He continued to acquire ancient statuary and four boxes of statues and several pictures were sent from Rome. In Florence in April 1717 there were further payments to Biscioni for the Livy and in Padua he bought manuscripts from the library of S.Giovanni di Verdara. Biscioni introduced Coke to Apostolo Zeno, Bernardo Trevisani's librarian in Venice, from whom he bought more manuscripts. Joseph Smith of Williams & Smith, acting as Coke's agent in Venice, laid out over 7,000 Venetian livres for these purchases in Padua and Venice.6 Coke left Italy in June 1717, for Vienna, Prague, Dresden and Paris. He returned to England on 13 May 1718, within a month of his coming of age, but his collecting in Italy was to continue through agents. William Kent was sent £200 on 25 June 1718 for pictures and antiquities bought in Rome; thirty years later Matthew Brettingham was buying a great deal of statuary in Rome for Lord Leicester (as Thomas Coke had become).
Coke went abroad on leaving Eton in 1771, already a fashionable and handsome young man. His £200 travel allowance was increased by £500 a year from his great-aunt, the Dowager Countess of Leicester.1 During the winter of 1771-2 he attended the Academy at Turin, where he met his Norfolk acquaintances Thomas Kerrich and Martin Folkes Rishton. On 17 April 1772 Coke witnessed the Young Pretender's marriage at Macerata and apparently followed the couple to Rome. His attachment to the young Countess of Albany (as the Stuart bride became known) was rewarded with a white cockade and allegedly it was she who commissioned from Batoni the splendid whole-length portrait of Coke (dated 1774), standing before the Vatican Ariadne, whose features were said to resemble her own (Holkham; Clark/Bowron, 377). Horace Walpole said she had 'permitted [Coke] to have her picture'.2  Coke's subsequent itinerary is not entirely clear. In November 1773, eighteen months after coming to Rome from Macerata, he was in Florence, having an amicable reunion with his relation Lady Mary Coke who thought him 'a very pretty man'. From Rome at some stage Coke went to Naples and visited Herculaneum with, it has been said, his old friend Francis Rawdon, in which case the journey occurred in January 1774, see Rawdon. The otherwise unknown painter Heygate painted them with Lord Mountmorres scaling Vesuvius (the picture sold in 1887). Coke was back in Florence for the Carnival in 1774 and afterwards intended to return home, but, according to Kerrich, 'finding ye weather stormy and himself not very well, he changed his plan, and determined to take ye way by land through France, and came by Genoa in his return to Turin'. There Coke again met Kerrich who said they 'ran about to see Milan together, though as his disorder turned out an ague he could not accompany us in all our expeditions'. In April 1774 Coke was back in Rome, whence he made a three-day excursion to Tivoli with Kerrich and others. It was probably at this time that he shared an audience with the Pope (Clement XIV) with Kerrich. Coke left Italy soon after, returning home through Vienna where, according to Sir Robert Keith, he 'made considerable havock amongst the young Beauties'. He was in England by July 1774. Although better known abroad for his appearance than for his connoisseurship, 'le bel Anglais' collected gems and casts. In January 1774 Jenkins reported that Coke had 'run away with the Cameo of the Claudius', and a fine sardonyx of Minerva which he acquired remains at Holkham, together with a mosaic of an animal combat from Hadrian's Villa.3 From the tomb of Nonius the Senator he acquired a precious antique ring (at Cannon Hall, Barnsley, in 1908). He also commissioned from Thomas Banks the Death of Germanicus of 1774 (Holkham).4

Cole spent at least ten years in Venice, where he was secretary, chargé d'affaires and then resident. He was evidently enthusiastic over contemporary Venetian painting, being closely acquainted with Rosalba Carriera and Joseph Smith, with whom he shared a dealer's business sense and, apparently, a certain lack of refinement.  It is said he first met Rosalba in Venice in 1701,1 and between September 1704 and 1708 he wrote her a number of letters while he was in Italy but away from Venice, their content suggesting he already knew her well.2 Most are written in Italian ('escusa mio stilo, sono forestiero') and some in French. In the summer of 1704 he had visited Vicenza and Verona and on 9 September he wrote that he was setting off next day from Padua, through Bologna (where he would stay for five or six days) and Loreto to Rome, where he was determined to find a supply of good pastel crayons for her.3 Cole was then travelling with John Bourchier, whom he did not mention to Rosalba.4 From Rome on 1 November he told her how much her miniature portrait of him was admired and that there was no miniaturist in Rome who could compare with her. It is clear this was his first visit to Rome, and he was greatly impressed not only by St Peter's but with the baroque church of S.Ignazio; he particularly mentioned the drawings and paintings of Carlo Maratti, whom he also met.  On 22 November 1704 he wrote to Rosalba commissioning a sleeping Venus in a garden to be painted on ivory. By 10 January 1705 he had the pastel crayons ready to send her; two weeks later (31 January) he had spoken with the secretary of the Accademia di S.Luca [Giuseppe Ghezzi] and established that Rosalba would have to send her self portrait 'et qualche piccola cosa' to be elected-he would submit her works. Ghezzi was still awaiting her works on 14 March and Cole would send her diploma as soon as her pictures arrived. On 22 April he was sending the Hon. John Scudamore to her and he hoped she would paint his portrait. On 2 May he sent her, through Thomas Frankland, a book describing the Accademia. On 9 May he was recommending Richard Tighe and saying that many Englishmen were coming to Venice all hoping to sit to her; he had failed to get a passport for Naples, and Maratti was growing impatient to have Rosalba's portrait for the Accademia. On 15 August Cole said he would be leaving Rome on 24 September, but would not return to Venice until about December. On 19 September Cole at last received her self portrait, and he was about to leave Rome for Siena and Leghorn (Rosalba's election to the Accademia took place on 27 September).  It is not clear whether Cole then returned to England or stayed in Italy, but he is next recorded as secretary to the 4th Earl of Manchester on his special mission to Venice. On 1 July 1707 Cole told Rosalba he would be accompanying the new ambassador at his official entry into the City on the 21st, see Manchester. It was probably Cole who recommended to him the painter G.F. Pellegrini, Rosalba's brother-in-law.5 In March 1708 Manchester recommended Cole to succeed him as resident, being 'very proper for this place',6 and Cole was made chargé d'affaires in Venice from October 1708 to September 1714.7 By October 1708 he was living in Venice in a house with a garden near 'Sigr Luca' [Carlevaris], another painter patronised by Manchester.8  In 1710-11 Cole corresponded with Lord Dartmouth concerning the prices of pictures signed by Sebastiano Ricci and Niccolo Cassana,5 and on 1 May 1711 he sent to England an inventory of the disputed pictures from the Gonzaga collection (then hung in a palace near Joseph Smith's house).9 Between March and early May 1712 he was in Milan 'and elsewhere' in connection with the visit of the Electoral Prince of Saxony's visit to Italy.7 In May 1714 he was having clandestine meetings at Smith's residence with the newly-appointed Venetian ambassador in London, Niccolo Tron.10 Cole had meanwhile married (bigamously) a well known 'file de joye', with whom he went to England in 1714-15.11 They returned to Venice where Cole succeeded as British resident in May 1715, but he was not popular-'the Userie, they say, was practised openlike in his house',12-and he was shunned by the British community, 'save Mr Smith a Merchant [Joseph Smith] ... And it's said Mr Smith will sue for to succeed Mr Cole as Resident'.13  In 1735 Cole published his Historical and Political Memoirs, a collection of diplomatic correspondence from 1697 to 1708, concerning those events in which he and the Earl of Manchester were principally involved; he himself translated texts from 'Latin, Italian, French, German, Spanish and Low-Dutch'.
Viscount Cole ('a very good sort of young man - but very Irish') was in Rome at the beginning of 1792 with Sir Robert Waller.1 On leaving Rome for Naples he was given a portrait of Emma Hamilton by Alexander Day, for her husband's approval.2 Cole spent the third week of June in Venice.3



He was presumably the 'Colebroke' whom Joseph Spence met at Turin between October 1739 and September 1740.1 He may have sat to Rosalba Carriera in Venice.2
In February 1728 'Colbroogh' appealed to Stosch for help in retrieving his loan to a Franciscan missionary at Bombay;1 reimbursed in April, he was still at Rome in October.2

Nothing is known of his first visit to Italy, but Coleraine went a second time in 1723 (DNB). He arrived in Rome in October 1723,1 and Conyers Middleton came a week later. Both were collectors, Coleraine acquiring prints and drawings of 'all the antiquities, buildings and pictures in Italy' (now Corpus, Oxf.), an activity leading to a 'particular intimacy' with the marchese Scipione Maffei and to membership of the Republica Litteraria di Arcadia, and the Society of Antiquaries.2 In October 1724, six months after Middleton's departure, Coleraine was conversing openly with Jacobites in Rome.3 He was again in Rome on 6 March 1725 and left on 7 April,4 visiting Padua in July.5 Coleraine was in Florence and Rome at the beginning of 1729.6 His Raphael Christ and St John ('lately bought in Italy') and a Luca Giordano he had acquired were praised by Sir John Clerk in 1733.7 Coleraine may have been in Italy at the birth of his (illegitimate) daughter Henrietta at Crema in September 1745 (DNB).


Collet a 'young Gentleman of fine talents', succeeded James Holford as British consul in Genoa in December 1776.1 Much of his correspondence with W.D. Poyntz, chargé d'affaires at Turin, survives (Genoa cons.corr.MSS), revealing little of his personality, save that he had almost lost the use of one eye. In June 1778 a Mr Lee, a musician, and Hugh Barron, the painter, had rooms in his house; in December 1779 Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) dined there.2 In 1782 he was cited in the court martial of General James Murray.3 At his residence in Genoa in February 1785 the Rev. William Gunn enjoyed 'as fine a Dish of green Pease as you would ever wish to see'.3 Collet died at Genoa in 1788 (before the end of April) when his partner Joseph Brame temporarily became chargé d'affaires.4
In September 1775 a certain Collet, calling himself a clergyman, caused a stir in Florence by wearing the order of the Thistle under his coat. He 'chose to wear it in that manner instead of round his Neck to avoid the Eclat of it'; though careful to avoid the English he 'continually walked about the streets'.1 He was probably the 'Colet Cavaliere Inglese' in Florence in July 1775.2 From Florence he went to Rome, where he lived in style until he was given a 'drubbing' by Hendrick, the Duchess of Kingston's agent, for pursuing an English girl of good repute; by February 1777 he had absconded.3


A Jacobite, he was listed in Italy in December 1717.1 and was in Rome in November 1718.2
From Leghorn, Collings and his partner Humphrey Chetham accompanied two visitors to Florence for six days in May/June 1702.1 Collings paid 'too little attention to the perils of business and fell into bad health', eventually dying of the wrong medicine.2


Collins 'a Roman Catholick who keeps a publick house' in Florence on the Strada Ghibellina 'for the English Gentlemen that travel', had come to Florence c.1713. He had been valet to Giraldi (the Tuscan Envoy to England) and 'the late Grand Duke' [Cosimo III] provided him with a pension of 10 crowns a month.1 In Florence his inn ('generally full and not the most reasonable') became the meeting place for the earliest Florentine Masonic lodge, as Collins (a mason himself) could arrange banquets there.2 In 1727 he arranged a match for his pretty daughter Anna Maria (d. 1763) with Willoughby Bertie, later 3rd Earl of Abingdon.  In the spring of 1726 she had been engaged to the celebrated Florentine Dr Cocchi 'who was most passionately in love with her', but the engagement was broken off at the return to Florence of Willoughby Bertie, who married her in Switzerland; see Willoughby Bertie. Collins remained an inn keeper, but became known as Sir John Collins (cf. CP, sub Abingdon). Lord Middlesex (a mason, later 2nd Duke of Dorset) dined with him in Rome in 1732,3 and Collins signed a receipt for lodging and other expenses for Sir Roger Newdigate in December 1739.4 His brother (described as 'Lord Abingdon's uncle') was living in Florence in May 1765; he was probably the 'Pandolfo' Collins, one of the series of caricatures engraved by Patch c.1769/70.5

When Collins had turned to miniature painting George Cumberland had given him advice; in April 1782 George's brother Richard wrote: 'Collins I hear is gone to Rome' (7 Apr. 1782, Add.36493, f.302).




Collopy was enabled to study in Rome through a fund set up in his home town of Limerick by an Augustinian friar, Father Walsh. By Easter 1771 Collopy was recorded in Rome living in the same house on the Via Babuino as the Irish landscape painter, Hugh Primrose Dean.1  By December 1772 Collopy was in Naples copying the Danae of Titian at the Capo di Monte and living in rooms opposite the palace.2 Two months later, still in Naples, he painted portraits of a Mr Kingsman and of Mme Tenducci (in the character of Sappho), whom he also attended 'in the Evenings to instruct her in Drawing'.3 Whilst in Naples he corresponded with the Irish landscape painter James Forrester at Rome; he encouraged visitors who were leaving for Rome to visit Forrester's studio to see his works as well as a version of The Descent from the Cross by Ribera, which Collopy considered superior to that in [the Certosa of] S. Martino in Naples.4
Charles Collyer and his companion Ralph Winter ('never was a man of his bulk more active and indefatiguable') were in Florence and Rome at the end of 1779.1 In Naples they joined another Norfolkman Edward Roger Pratt, who thereafter shared Collyer's route (and later became his brother-in-law).2 Henry Bankes provided them with a letter of introduction to John Strange, the British resident in Venice,3 where they arrived in April 1780.4 Collyer had met John Soane in Rome, and with Pratt and Soane he travelled from Verona to Mantua on 8 May.5 In 1789-90 Soane was to build Gunthorpe Hall for him.6
Francis Colman was first in Italy in 1717, when he met Philip Stosch in Leghorn.1 He returned in 1724 as British resident to the Tuscan court, a position he occupied for nearly nine years, in which, despite poor health, he showed himself to be both cultured and ambitious.2 En route for Florence, he sat to Rosalba Carriera in Venice on 4 January 17253 (Christie's, 3 Aug. 1795); he also stopped at Padua,4 Vicenza (where he was delayed by illness), Piacenza and Parma.5 Soon after his arrival in Florence his consumption worsened and he became Dr Cocchi's patient and friend.6 He was made a member of the Florentine Academy in the summer of 1727,7 and the following summer he and Cocchi were guided around Rome by Stosch.8 At the time of George II's coronation in 1727 Colman was rebuked for 'acting above his character ... and expecting to be paid for it'.9 He returned to England at the end of 1728 for a year's leave. He was back in Florence in October 1729. In 1730 he corresponded with G.F. Handel and Owen Swiney over the engagement of Senesino to sing in London, and he became the librettist for Handel's opera Ariadne.10 In 1730 William Hoare was recommended to him and painted his portrait11 (Christie's, 3 Aug. 1795). In February 1731 Stosch, harrassed in Rome for his spying activities, arrived to place himself under Colman's protection.12 Later that year Colman was appointed British envoy to Parma, where he spent two months with Cocchi.13 Joseph Spence first heard improvvisatori recite at Colman's house in Florence in 1732.14 In August 1732 he was too ill to accompany his friend Bubb Dodington from Florence to Rome, and by December he had moved to Pisa for the air.15 He died there on 25 April 1733 ('reduced by a consumption to a perfect skeleton') and his embalmed body was sent to England (the entrails buried in the Protestant cemetery at Leghorn).16 He left a wife, Mary, and his considerable library was sold to Tom Osborne (bookseller in Gray's Inn), a catalogue being published in 1738. After her husband's death Mary Colman remained in Florence until September 1733, when she left for England with her children George (1732-94) and Caroline, travelling via Bologna and Turin.17 George, in part taking after his father, became the successful dramatist and theatre manager.



Travelling with Richard Woodward, he had been to Russia and Germany before coming to Italy.1 In February 1757 they were in Naples, where they met Richard Phelps.2 Early in July they were in Venice in the same lodgings as Andrew Archer and his tutor John Anderson, with whom they returned to England.3

Charles Compton travelled with Dr James Hay, who had previously conducted his eldest brother James (Lord Compton) on the Continent (and would shortly afterwards accompany his older brother George). Charles was idle, had 'never been set in a method', and of his time at Eton and Oxford Hay wrote 'Good God, what a great deal of precious time squandered away'. The tour was expected to make him 'capable to follow some sort of business at his return home'.1 In Toulon Compton and his companion Sir George Brown drank to the Pretender, whom they planned to see at Rome 'if it be possible without danger'.2 Hay then abandoned Compton at Siena for several months before allowing him to Rome, arguing the 'inconveniences' of too many Englishmen in the city, and the unhealthy heat. 'I settled him in a good pension,' wrote Hay in justification, 'gave him his masters, regulated, in writing, all his necessary expences, left with him also in writing, an easy method, how to make a quick and easy improvement in his studies, of languages, history and Mathematicks, with some advice what company to keep, and what to avoid'. Compton stayed seven months in Siena with 'express orders not to move', after which Hay called him to Rome. Governor and charge spent eight months in the city (with a visit to Naples); besides Hay, Compton had masters for fencing, language and architecture. His allowance was modest and Hay had to plead an extra £50 for a coach ('he cannot decently be without one'). In November 1719 they were detained by bad weather in Venice, but by 4 December they were in Padua, on the road to Turin.3 Passing the wintry Alps was frightful to Hay: 'Crossing such prodigious hills that astonish'd him [Compton] at the very sight of them in a season when winter appear'd in its most dismal, horrible aspect, he can tell you how he was like to leap down the most half of Mont Cenis all at once and God knows whither next, passing all along the habitation of gray wolves, white partridges, grisly bears ... and other strange, hideous monsters whose names I do not know because not mentioned in history.' In spite of Hay's reluctance to visit Paris ('all things being so exhorbitant' prior to the collapse of Law's system), Compton and his governor spent a month there before finally returning to England.

He was on his way out to Italy in the spring of 1720, unsuccessfully planning to meet his brother Charles and Dr James Hay in Paris en route.1 He was at Padua with James Hay on 21 December.2
Lord James Compton set out in 1707 to view the Spanish Wars,1 accompanied by Dr James Hay and, for part of the way, by a Mr J. Digges. Hay and Compton wrote regular letters to Lord Northampton describing their progress: carefully skirting France, they came to Italy through Germany and stayed a month in Padua. Broughton, the English consul at Venice, approved of Hay's choice of Padua, a good place 'to Learn Italian, & out of Harms way as well as to save Charges',2 though Compton thought it 'not the most agreable' and chafed at his Paduan teacher, 'an old Priest ... I doubt he knows little of the Matter.'3 They spent ten weeks in Venice, detained by bad weather, and by February Compton regarded it as 'little better than a prison'.4 Compton visited St Peter's four times in the first five days at Rome, declaring 'three times a week will not content me so very glorious & delicate a Pile of building it is'.5 While in Rome he had daily masters for Italian, architecture, dancing, fencing and antiquities. At the end of August Hay, Digges and Compton set out on a tour of Tuscany, after which they settled for five months in Turin where, apart from the Academy, there was a ban on operas and comedies. Despite such rigour Hay complained of his pupil that the 'onely exercise he applies himself to is dancing'.6 Acquaintances included the Princess Mary of Carignan who, wrote Hay, 'was not very indifferent for my Lord Compton'.7 After a second visit to Venice Compton and Hay returned to England via Frankfurt and Utrecht.
By February 1797 Compton 'of a noble English Family [and] living on his own Fortune' had been in Italy for five years for his health, and an application on his behalf for a 'Certificate & permission' to prolong his stay was then sought from Sir William Hamilton by George Graves in Rome.1 Compton's obsequious letters to Hamilton from 1795 to 1800 from Posillipo, Leghorn and Florence reveal that he was in Italy with his wife and small son.2 They were, doubtless, the Mr and Mrs Compton who in 1794 held weekly balls in Naples.3

A terracotta portrait of C. Congleton by Colin Morison was in James Byres's house in Rome in 1790 (Byres inv., Byres MSS).

A former Jesuit, he became chaplain and secretary to Monsignor (later Cardinal) Rinucci in Rome. He was the executor of Father Thorpe's will and some of his correspondence with the Liège Academy concerning that will has been published (T.G. Holt, Stonyhurst Mag., [1962], 204-9. See John Thorpe).
Friendly, sincere, honourable and munificent in disposition, - but whimsical, wrong headed and positive',1 Tom Conolly was in Italy in 1758 when he was painted in Rome by Mengs (NGI). In his lifetime the interior of Castletown, designed for his great-uncle by Alessandro Galilei, was completed.2
Conolly, the 'incorrigible Whig', arrived in Leghorn at the end of 1726 with George England and a Mr Wright.1 From Leghorn they visited Florence on the way to Rome,2 where their arrival was noted by Stosch.3 A caricature of Conolly by P.L. Ghezzi in the Vatican library is inscribed 'Monsieur Conolly Irlandese' with a note saying Conolly left Rome on 18 June 1727;4 it was subsequently etched by Arthur Pond. After their departure Stosch reported Conolly and England ['Eldret'] two 'loyal subjects of the King'.5
Carolus Conrij Hibernus'/'Carolus Conry Hibernus quondam Petri' was listed at Padua University each year between September 1725 and September 1729 (Brown 1795; Andrich, 75, 167-9).

Sir Marmaduke Constable and [Richard?] Towneley were described on arrival in Florence as two rich Catholic gentlemen from Yorkshire, but, wrote Stosch 'comme l'un et l'autre ont passé l'age de voyager pour plaisir, j'ai lieu de croire, qu'ils sont venus en Italie pour d'autres intrigues'.1 In February Towneley and Constable were no longer living together.2 Soon after arrival in Rome with the 6th Earl of Salisbury, Constable was visited by his relation Charles Radclyffe (a Jacobite).3 At the end of March 1733 Constable joined Towneley at Bologna for the opera.4 In May Constable, Towneley, Salisbury, Samuel Haynes and a Mr Goddard were listed at Venice, and by June some of them, including Constable, were in Florence.5 When Towneley left hurriedly for France in September, Constable was expected to go with him, but he was in Florence at the end of October 1733, having come from Leghorn and Pisa.6 In November Sir Marmaduke overlapped with a Mr Constable for three days in Florence before leaving for Rome with Salisbury and Haynes.7 According to Stosch, Sir Marmaduke was the only English visitor to Rome to attend the birthday feast the Pretender gave for his eldest son in January 1734.8 In September 1735 he was fined for absence by the Jacobite Lodge in Rome.9 Sometime before December 1738 Samuel Crisp met Sir Marmaduke in Lyons and received from him useful information on the journey to Italy.10
In the summer of 1787 the Duchess of Albany paid much attention to 'young Mr C.' at Albano and Rome, 'out of gratitude for what his mother Lady Winny [Winifred Maxwell, dau. of the Earl of Nithsdale] had [done] for her at Paris'.1 In December Constable took lodgings in Rome for a further six months, seeking, wrote Father Thorpe 'to amuse a melancholy disposition with private enjoyments'.2  An anonymous account of a journey to Italy in 1784 (Anon.jnl.MSS 1784) has been associated with Marmaduke William Constable; it outlines a journey from Leghorn to Florence, Rome, Naples and back north to Vicenza, listing prominent artists in Rome-and describing the people living round the Pontine marshes (then being drained) as 'yellow as saffron, asthmatic unhappy & Languid'.
From an old Yorkshire Catholic family, William Constable was a man of liberal views and considerable learning, both in the fine arts and in natural and experimental philosophy. He was three times in Italy, but little is known of his two earlier visits. A 'Sig. Costable Ingle.Catolico' aged thirty was in Rome in 1750 lodging at the Casa Guarnieri with four other English Catholics ('Agoston' [Sir Thomas Haggerston], 'Flitudd' [W. Fleetwood] a major domo, William 'Squir' [Squire] and Charles 'Vater' [Walter]).1 On 28 September 1766 James Byres wrote to him in Yorkshire concerning sculpture and cameos, and enclosing letters for a Mr Howard (see Edward Howard). The familiarity of the letter suggests that Constable had recently met Byres in Rome2 and he was possibly the 'Constabele' in Capua on 5 January 1765 going from Naples to Rome.3  The tour he made in 1769-71 is better documented.4 He travelled with his sister Winefred (c.1731-74), who kept a diary in which she recorded the minutest details of her brother's health (which was never good), but very few comments on Italy.5 In Florence Constable was to discuss cures for the gout with Horace Mann who found him 'a very sensible man';6 General James Pattison noticed them both in Florence on 9 October.7 Mann introduced them to William Hamilton, who had received them both in Naples by 27 November.8 By February they were back in Rome where Father Thorpe deplored their lack of Catholic respect: William Constable, he later wrote, 'stifled every sentiment of devotion, omitted every exercise of religion and disregarded the faith'.9 On 10 February Constable wrote that he was following James Byres on a course of antiquities and in an undated letter of that month he described his days:_'the morning till 12 to myself. then Mr Byres & Antiquity & Pictures & Sculpture till four or Later. After Dinner, Dress, Crowds, Conversation, Cards, Concerts. as all alike, equally indifferent, Cold Tedious'; the tedium was slightly relieved when Winifred won '23 pounds' at cards playing with General Shuvalov.10  Father Thorpe also noticed that Constable was buying expensively in Rome.11 He was gathering works of art for Burton Constable, his remodelled Yorkshire home: from Maron the remarkable double portrait of himself and his sister as Cato and Marcia (Burton Constable), eventually dispatched from Civitavecchia in December 1774, and two pictures 'in imitation of the Busts of Brutus and Scipio' (finished May 1771; untraced); from Pichler their carved cameo portraits (Burton Constable); from Philip Wickstead the portrait of the dwarf Baiocho (Burton Constable), and from James Nevay copies from Annibale Carracci and Guido Reni (Burton Constable). Through Byres Constable obtained from Piranesi a flower picture; he also bought the seventeen volumes of works by Piranesi (who dedicated plates in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778] to both Constable and his sister), and other engravings by Cunego after Gavin Hamilton. Constable subsequently maintained a correspondence with Byres (see note 2) concerning these commissions and others, such as those of 1785 for Roman views by Volpato and Ducros, and the portraits by the aged Batoni of his Italian relatives: a copy from the Subleyras portrait of the comtesse Mahony (Lady Anne Clifford), Constable's first cousin (Burton Constable; Clark/Bowron 454) and portraits of her daughter and son-in-law, the Princess and Prince Giustiniani (SNG and priv. coll., Italy; Clark/Bowron 456-7).
He arrived in Florence with Henry Fermor ('the rich one of Oxfordshire') and two other Catholics; his brother [?John Constable] was one of the Pretender's gentlemen.1 Eight months later their route home was diverted from Turin to Leghorn, due to the wars in northern Italy.2
Maxwell', commended by Father Thorpe for his 'virtuousness',1 was travelling in Italy with his Catholic tutor, Charles Plowden. Henry Swinburne met him in Turin, dining with Poyntz.2 They were in Milan in October 1779 when Plowden was 'hoping to receive instructions from Mr Constable in regard of which way they must now direct their steps'.1

Edward Conway went abroad with Colonel Charles O'Hara (the intimate friend of Edward's cousin, General Henry Conway), most probably for his health. A 'comely son of Anak', it was observed that a colossal antique foot in the courtyard of the Capitol was 'exactly the length of Mr E. Conway's height and the great toe the thickness of his body'.1 Conway and O'Hara met the Ramsays in Florence and crossed paths with the Berrys at Rome, Terni and Turin; with Dr John Parkinson at Tivoli and Milan, and with William Assheton at Venice and Milan.2 In Turin on 14 October Conway was noticed in a party of Englishmen at the 'Hotel d'Angleterre' with Frederick North, Blackett and Bingley,3 but soon he was lying 'ill at the auberge'.4 At Lyons the following April, 'daily worse', he was visited by his brother George; he died there on 29 August 1785.5
In March 1737 Horace Walpole had declined an invitation to go to Italy with Lord Conway and George Montagu, then at Rheims.1 In Rome in February 1738 George Sinclair of Ulbster witnessed a prank involving Conway, the 4th Earl of Sandwich and Prince Colonna's barge.2 In March 1739 Conway was in France with his tutor Walter Bowman (who in 1765 was to accompany his son Lord Beauchamp to Italy).3 He was briefly back in London in April, then from June to September 1739 he was with Horace Walpole and Gray in Rheims; they separated at Geneva in October 1739.4 Conway was in Genoa in late November 1739 and had returned to England by 6 March 1740.5
George Conway, the 'handsomest giant in the world', arrived from Italy at Lyons on 23 April 1785 in order to visit his dying brother Edward;1 he was probably the Mr Conway met by Sir James Hall in Florence on 9 November 1784.2
In July 1751 Horace Walpole recommended his cousin Colonel Henry Conway to Horace Mann; Conway was joining his regiment at Minorca, 'but is determined to reckon Italy within his quarters'.1 When Conway arrived in December, Mann persuaded him to stay at the Casa Manetti: 'we divided the whole house, and are both at large'.2 Through Mann's contriving, Conway studied medals with Dr Cocchi, but told his brother 'as I never think of being a medallist, I am not much concerned about it ... There are but two things at all thought of here - love and antiquities, of which the former predominates so greatly that I think it seems to make the whole history and the whole business of this place'.3 On learning he was soon to command a new regiment, Conway left Florence with Lord Stormont to visit Rome, where they lived some weeks 'totally employed in virtu', dispensing with 'all civilities that would make them lose any time'.4 He was back in England in mid-March 1752, Walpole then finding him 'much leaner and great cracks in his beauty'; in August Mann sent on a case of alabaster vases and a box of books to Conway in England.5
In a letter of 21 May 1761 Conyers indicated that he had previously been in Italy.1 He was possibly the Conyers with Ayres in Siena in July 1739, dining daily at Lady Pomfret's.2 A year later the Roman antiquary Ficoroni, writing to the 4th Earl of Carlisle, begged to be remembered to Conyers and Ayres.3
She accompanied her brother-in-law, Sir Roger Newdigate, and Charles Parker (his cousin) to Italy in 1774-5. In 1775 John Strange, the British resident in Venice, passed on his congratulations to Miss Conyers on her 'fossil acquisitions'.1 In 1782 Charles Parker took lessons in Florence from 'the little Fabrini of whom Mrs Conyers learnt to draw'.2



In 1751 and 1752 Cook ['Kuch'] lodged in Rome with Richard Phelps ['Feb/Felp'] at the Palazzo Mignanelli.1 Both belonged to Lord Charlemont's set in Rome, and both appeared in caricatures by Reynolds painted in 1751.2 On 18 March 1752 Cook was reported to have left Rome for Naples.3 On his return he was listed among the 'Generous Promoters' of Lord Charlemont's British Academy.4 In September he went to Florence and Lucca with another promoter, Sir Thomas Kennedy.5 By 10 June 1753 he had returned to Naples, having spent nine weeks on the island of Capri, and had already persuaded Kennedy to return with him to the island.6
Cooke visited Rome with Richard Rawlinson in January and at the end of the month he went to Naples with John Kearney.1 Cooke and Kearney were in Padua in June.2

He was the 'particular friend' of James Barry at Turin.1 On 1 January 1772 he offered his services to Horace Mann during the absence of William Lynch, the British envoy at Turin.2 The Duchess of Beaufort met Lynch and a Mr Cook in Turin on 1 July 1774.
In October 1789 Mrs Cookson was carried over Mont Cenis on an 'old wooden Chair' attached to poles;1 it was perhaps the same Mrs Cookson staying in Venice with her husband in the following spring.2






- 1735 RomeAfter inheriting a 'considerable succession' Cooper left his engraving practice to study painting in Rome. In Italy Guthrie, a painter, persuaded him to resume his profession in Edinburgh. Robert Strange became his apprentice in Edinburgh, and was encouraged to work from prints and drawings collected by Cooper in Italy (Dennistoun, 1:21-6).
Cooper painted many Italian views, particularly of Rome, Tivoli and Naples. Patronised by William Hamilton in Naples c.1772-3,1 he became Jacob More's friend and associate in Rome.2 Cooper was in England by 1778, when he exhibited Italian views at the Royal Academy. In 1793 More made him his executor (with Sir James Wright and Thomas Jenkins).3 Three references to a Richard Cooper travelling in Italy with Thomas Merriman in 1771-2 probably refer to the artist: they were in Venice ('Cuper' and 'Monton') on 24 April 1771 with a Captain Core[?];4 in Capua ('Rchd Copper' and Thomas Merriman), going to or coming from Naples, on 5 March 1772,5 and again in Venice ('Riccardo Copher' and 'Tomaso Moriman') on 21 April 1772.6








Cope visited the Duke of Shrewsbury in Venice with Thomas Frankland.1 He was possibly the Cope who in June 1707 played the violin at concerts given in Charles Browne's inn at Rome, in company with John Blathwayt and Italian virtuosi.2
Very thin, pale, [and] a little pock-marked', Copley travelled to Italy with the older English painter George Carter, bearing with him letters of introduction to James Byres and the Abbé Grant at Rome.1 They left England in August 1774 and had reached Genoa, 'a lovely city' by 8 October. They sailed to Leghorn and went via Pisa to Florence; on 24 October they were in Rome. Gavin Hamilton procured Copley lodgings and he studied antiquities at the French Academy or at the Capitol. In December he painted an Ascension (Boston MFA) which gained Hamilton's approval. On 18 January he went to Naples with Giulian Verplanck, a merchant born in Amsterdam who had settled in New York (where he subsequently sat to Copley), and to his delight William Hamilton, the British envoy, greeted him by saying that 'Mr Copley needs no introduction; his name is sufficient to introduce him anywhere'. With Ralph and Alice Izard from South Carolina (whom he had first met in Florence), he went on a three-day tour to Paestum.  He had returned to Rome with the Izards by 12 February, and he painted their joint portrait (Boston MFA) which was nearing completion in March 1775. Before leaving Rome on 4 June he had bought some casts, including one of the Laocoon, but they were subsequently smashed in transit. He arrived in Florence on 9 June and a week later was in Parma. There he executed a commission from Lord Grosvenor for a copy of the Correggio Holy Family. He copied alongside William Parry, working each day from 8 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to sunset, Joseph Wright of Derby observing that he worked hard, but with 'infinite labour'. Copley was still in Parma on 22 August, his copy 'near done'; he was in Cologne on 23 November, having travelled through Venice and Mannheim, and by the end of the year he was back with his family in London.
He is said to have travelled on the Continent in 1790 and 1792. In Brussels in 1791 he was considered 'a pretty odd young man' and in 1799 he was described as 'Jacobinical and tiresome'.1 He was probably the Mr Copley in Venice in May 1792.2 Sarah Bentham met Sir Lionel in Rome in February 1794, and he was part of the 'prodigious number' who left the city for Naples the following summer.3


Miss Copley visited Mrs and Miss Hamilton, wife and daughter of the painter H.D. Hamilton, in Rome on 29 March 1783, and she was with Mr and Mrs 'Knowlt' [?] in Florence in October-November (Ramsay jnl.MSS).

During the three years Sir Corbet Corbet spent in Rome he was an active patron of British artists and an enthusiastic archaeologist. He is first mentioned in Italy with his wife at Florence in the summer of 1790,1 and by February 1792 they were living in Rome,2 in 'a style of considerable eminence ... Lady Corbet having a Conversation every Wednesday evening; which was frequented not only by all the British, but by many of the first Roman Nobility.'3 In 1792 John Deare sold a chimney piece (a 'Bas Relief of the Nine Muses in the Capitoline Museum') to Corbet for £120,4 and Robert Fagan painted the Corbets with their pet dogs.5 In 1793 Charles Grignion painted Corbet seated under an oak tree, and Corbet commissioned from George Wallis a pair of large landscapes which were nearing completion in Naples in March 1793. In May 1793 the Corbets were in Venice,6 and that year Corbet also sponsored excavations near S.Sebastiano on the Via Appia in Rome (illustrated in Labruzzi's Via Appia Illustrata in 1794).7 'Sir Corbet had a good many labourers at work', wrote Sir William Forbes, 'who had discovered some Subterraneous Apartments, whence they had brought up a few fragments of Statues & other Sculptures, but nothing hitherto of any value'.3 In 1794 Corbet joined Prince Augustus and Robert Fagan in excavations at Campo Iemini.8
John Corbet was presented to the Grand Duke at Florence in November 1772.1 In 1773 he was painted in Rome by Batoni (Worcester AM, Mass.; Clark/Bowron 362) and he also appeared in a conversation piece painted in Rome c.1773, probably by Wickstead (Ham House, and priv. coll.).2 Corbet acquired a Venus for Sundorne Castle from Gavin Hamilton's excavations at Tor Columbaro (commmenced 1771),3 and Piranesi dedicated to him one of the plates in Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778].
Corbet was in Padua on 5 January 1717,1 and in Naples six months later with a Mr Tyman (possibly Anthony Twyman).2 In 1718 he was described as a Hanoverian supporter in a list of visitors to Rome3 and he was still in Rome in the spring of 1718.4

On his first visit to Italy Corbett may have studied in Rome under Corelli for a year between 1711 and 1713 (DNB). In 1716 he settled in Italy and formed an outstanding collection of musical instruments funded, it was alleged, by his work as a spy on Jacobite activities (Grove). He was, therefore, probably the Corbet providing Francis Colman with news of the Pretender in Bologna in 1726.1 In 1728 he returned briefly to London on the publication of Le Bizzarie Universali, composed 'on all the new gustos in his travels through Italy' (DNB).
Driven from England by a 'scheme of economy' ('though they don't know well how to put [it] in practice', observed Horace Walpole), the Earl and Countess of Cork spent a year in Italy with their young daughter Lady Lucy Boyle (1744-92, m. 1765 4th Viscount Torrington).1 Although they intended to winter in Pisa, a lack of supplies and the 'dullness of the place' made them return to Florence, where Horace Mann judged them 'extreme good people'.1 By 1 May 1755 they had taken a country house at Marignolle outside Florence, and Lady Cork and her daughter attended some balls in Florence.2 On 16 September Cork presented a copy of Dr Johnson's Dictionary to the Accademia della Crusca.3 Before leaving he asked Mann to affirm that he had had no contact with the Jacobites.4  Lord Cork's principal occupation was the compilation of a history of Tuscany which dwelt upon the crimes of the Medici.5 It was never published, but parts were incorporated in his letters to William Duncombe which were printed in 1773 (Cork Letters). They contain both local observations and grand reflections. The Florentine cicisbeo, for example, who, should his charge enter into a 'particular discourse with another person ... retires into a corner of the room with the lap-dog, or sits in the window teaching the macaw to speak Italian' (x: 29 Nov. 1754), or the Grand Duke's Gallery in Florence where 'strangers are admitted to walk in the gallery all the morning, and to converse with marble gods and petrified emperors as freely as they please. The rooms within the gallery are kept under lock and key; no person is permitted to remain alone in any one of them' (viii: 30 Oct. 1754). Lord Corke recommended travel, 'not to see fashions, but states, not to taste different wines, but different governments; not to compare laces and velvets, but laws and politics'; then the traveller could 'return home perfectly convinced, that England is possessed of more freedom, justice and happiness than any nation under heaven' (xix: 5 May 1755).
Lord Cornbury travelled with his tutor Dr Thomas Hobart and with the Hon. John Dawnay and William Leigh. They visited Padua1 and Venice,2 and by March 1711 were settled in Rome3 where they remained until July, apart from a three-week excursion to Naples in April and May.4  Cornbury collected music,5 and when in May John Talman arranged an entertainment 'for the top virtuosi in Rome' he chose Cornbury as 'prince of the academy'.6 Talman advised him concerning a vast allegorical composition, to be executed by Giuseppe Chiari, on the theme of 'Learning and the Arts as the chief ornament of a Nobleman in order to render himself an Ornament to his Country',7 but nothing further was heard of it. Cornbury and his party left Rome on 16 July, passing from Florence through Lucca (where 'Lord Cobre' was observed in the summer8) to Bologna (12 September) and Ferrara (14 September),9 and they were in Genoa at the end of September.10 Charles Baldwyn met Cornbury and Leigh in Turin the following month on their way to Geneva.11
Lord Cornbury was in Rome by November 1730, living in the Casa dei Gesuiti with the Jacobite Patrick Darcy and his wife Anne; he was already a friend of the Jacobite Charles Radclyffe.1 He is also said to have gone to Rome in January 1731 with the Duchess of Buckingham, secretly meeting the Pretender, who made him a lord of the bedchamber at his departure in April.2 Cornbury had several meetings with the Pretender (who wept recalling the loyalty of the Hydes to the Stuarts).3 Cornbury was in Padua in June4 and expected home by August; 'c'est une tête fort reglé', wrote Stosch, 'homme d'esprit, fort flegmatique et sobre, et par consequent il seroit très dangereux, s'il est vray qu'il s'est jetté dans le Parti Jacobite'.3 P.L. Ghezzi's (undated) caricature of 'Mylord Carnesbury' is undoubtedly that of Cornbury (Sotheby's, 10 Dec. 1979).





His brief Italian tour of 1772 is described in his Italian journal (Cotes jnl.MSS) which, however, supplies few exact dates. At Rome frequent references to James Byres suggest he followed one of his courses. Cotes recorded his admiration of Pietro da Cortona's Barberini ceiling and the prints he bought of it were the only recorded purchases of virtù. On 20 April he went with Charles Townley, Patrick Russell and the Abbé Grant to Tivoli where they met 'Danes the painter' [doubtless Hugh Primrose Dean] and inspected Gavin Hamilton's 'spot for digging' at Hadrian's Villa. The following week Cotes and Russell visited Frascati. Cotes cites a brisk programme of 'the Places best worth seeing' in Naples. On his return to Rome, he contented himself 'with a review of the Principal things'. He visited Florence and Pisa on his return journey.



In May 1771 Cotton and a Mr Dickton travelled from Rome to Siena where they intended to learn Italian; a Mr Preston and 'Horun'[?] travelled with them.1 Preston and 'Orne'[?] had been staying near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1771.2 Cotton was presumably the Henry Cotton in Venice with Henry Fothergill in November 1771.3
In February 1704 he was in Rome with his governor,1 living in the parish of S.Andrea delle Fratte, the register describing Peter Redmaine as Cotton's 'Maggior d'mo'.2 On 27 April they were in Padua.3  He was probably also the Mr Cotton who with 'the Rector of the Jesuits' had visited the Duke of Shrewsbury on 12 January 1702; Shrewsbury met Cotton again at the Villa Borghese, this time with 'Webb and St Johns' [probably Francis St John].4

John Cotton travelled with Henry Vernon of Staffordshire, a fellow student from Cambridge.1 On 30 July 1739 Coutts bank sent him credit for £100 to Leghorn.2 They were at Turin sometime between October 1739 and September 1740.3 In June 1740 Cotton was expected from Venice in Florence,4 where Lady Pomfret mentioned him several times between 1 July and 30 December. She recorded Cotton and Vernon leaving Florence on 13 September, but she mentioned 'Mr Cottan' at Florence on 30 December.5 Horace Mann considered Vernon to be 'a very good-humoured and inoffensive man', and Walpole later asked Mann whether he remembered 'a tall Mr Vernon, who travelled with Mr Cotton'.6
Sir Robert Cotton arrived in Venice with a Mr Horton and a 'Mr Gouch'[?] on 22 September 1791 and left before them on 16 October.1 The following year he was in Rome for Easter;2 he returned to Venice in June, 'con Famiglia'.3 In 1792 Cotton's youngest daughter Sophia (d. 1838, later Lady Mainwaring) was painted in Rome by Robert Fagan (priv. coll.), the same year as her relations the Corbets. An unattributed portrait of Sir Robert painted in Rome was sold by Robinson and Fisher, 5 May 1932.

Mr Colthrop an Etonian acquaintance' was seen by Richard Pococke at Rome in February 1734. Coulthrope [so named in the Eton College Register], 'heir to a great estate', was at Venice in June and at Milan later the same month (Pococke letters MSS, Add.19939, f.3).


Courtenay's itinerary is taken from The present state of the manners, arts, and politics of France and Italy [1794], which he wrote as a series of letters in bathetic rhyming couplets (e.g. on Medici Venus: 'She spreads forth her fingers, a screen to her breast, / And her smile just expresses-You see I'm not drest!'). Courtenay's cynicism and 'classic mind' was much admired by James Boswell; perhaps his book was a satire, rather than a document.

Coussmaker was in Turin and introduced at Court on 26 October with Sir George Warren, Thomas Pitt (b. c.1758) and William and George Assheton.1 His itinerary is recorded in the journals of Mary Berry, Dr Parkinson and William Assheton.2 At Rome Colin Morison was his guide; Thomas Brand commented that the two were like 'a hen with a single chicken', while James Byres escorted a party of seven at the same time.3

In 1789 Thomas Coutts took his wife and three daughters to Italy through France, though Charles Fox had advised a route through Germany; 'snubbed' by Mr Pitt, he went without letters of introduction.1 In January 1790 in Rome Angelica Kauffman completed a portrait of his three daughters, Susan, Fanny and Sophia Coutts ('all dressed alike in white, attired like the muses or the graces').2 Mrs Coutts, no dilettante, thought the Colosseum would be 'a very pretty building', once finished and whitewashed.3 The family went on to Naples,4 but were back in Rome on 30 March 1790.5 In 1790 Coutts took his wife and daughters to Frascati to visit Henry Stuart, Cardinal Duke of York, who gave him a silver medal; later, as banker to the king, Coutts transmitted to the Cardinal his allowance from George III.6

Peter Cowling's rapid tour is described in his Journal (Cowling jnl.MSS). He arrived in Naples, with an unnamed companion, with 'Vesuvius Vomiting flames' and an earthquake threatening. Although he was keen to attend, he was advised not to go to the ceremony of the liquefaction of the blood of St Januarius, 'as the Common people were apprehensive of either an Earthquake or an Eruption in Case the Miracle did not succeed; when this event happens, they are apt to attribute it to the Hereticks being present'. He welcomed the services of Father James O'Kelly (presumably as an antiquarian guide), and climbed part of Vesuvius but, after burning his shoes and the guide 'falling down into some ashes ... it was judged prudent to recede'. On 29 September he attended a production of Robinson Crusoe at the Teatro Nova: 'The uninhabited Island had a Church Steeple, & a Cascade with Swans Swimming in a bason below; the naked Savages were finely ornamented with Feathers, & silk Vests & Bows & Arrows'. In Rome Cowling lodged at a German hotel and took a valet de place; he agreed to convey a ring from Nathaniel Marchant to Lord Spencer, and observed of the Pope no evidence of 'fasting, Mortification or self-denial'.
Lord Cowper resided in Florence for nearly thirty years. He had first gone to Italy 'wanting to ramble' and then, despite being elected an MP at Westminster and succeeding to his father's title and estates as 3rd Earl Cowper, he had stayed on in Florence, seduced by an elegant life style and the exercise of patronage. With extraordinary insouciance he continued to apply to the Crown, unsuccessfully, for honours: the Order of the Bath in 1765, the Garter or the Thistle in 1768 and 1780, and a Dukedom in 1782, but additional awards were appropriately confined to a Princedom of the Holy Roman Empire, granted in 1777.1 As Lord Fordwich, he had left Harwich on 11 January 1757 with Colonel John Chastellain, who recorded their journey in a diary in French.2 They visited Holland before travelling down the Rhine valley to Switzerland where they remained over two years. On 4 June 1759 they arrived at Verona, travelling to Vicenza, Padua and Venice. Returning via Padua on 21 June they met Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who found Fordwich 'a well-dispos'd youth'.3 In late June they were in Bologna and in July they had arrived at Florence. Fordwich became infatuated with both the city and the Marchesa Corsi, while Horace Mann offered 'une infinité de politesses'. In September he travelled from Leghorn to Rome and by 7 October he was in Naples where he struck up a friendship with Jacob Houblon and his tutor Jonathan Lipyeatt. By 14 November the party had returned to Rome where James Russel may have acted as their cicerone. There Fordwich bought paintings (which he later regretted) from Thomas Jenkins, see Robert Strange. Despite his father's opposition and Chastellain's pleading, Fordwich insisted on returning to Florence and there, on 1 January 1760, Chastellain left him and returned to Switzerland. Thereafter Fordwich seems to have spent most of his life in Florence, though a trip to Pola on the Adriatic coast in the summer of 1760 with Lord Grey (later 5th Earl of Stamford), Sir Henry Mainwaring, Houblon and Lipyeatt is recorded by Patch in a painting dated 1760 (Dunham Massey). He probably travelled to Rome again in 1762 where he met Mengs, whose work he consistently admired and from whom he commissioned paintings during the artist's visits to Florence in 1769 and 1773-4.  Aided by a considerable fortune and the Earldom which he inherited in September 1764, Lord Cowper was soon a leading member of Florentine society. He received a number of academic honours; in 1766 he became a member of the Florentine Academy and two years later was elected to the Accademia della Crusca. He was also to be elected to the Accademia Etrusca and the Accademia di Belle Arti at Venice. Cowper maintained an interest in music and was an influential member of the Accademia degli Armonici of which he became a director in 1772. He maintained his own private band of instrumental musicians at the Villa Palmieri, where in 1768 Handel's Alexander's Feast was performed.4 By the mid-1770s he had developed a deep interest in science, especially electricity, and did much to encourage Count Volta in his researches. Cowper was admitted to the Royal Society of London in 1777 and his collection of scientific instruments was sold after his death to the University of Bologna.5  At the same time Cowper developed his interests in the fine arts. In 1767 he commissioned a monument to his father from Francis Harwood, the English sculptor residing in Florence, which was eventually installed in Hertingfordbury Church in 1770.6 He supported Giuseppe Macpherson, whom he commissioned to make miniature copies of the Grand Ducal self-portrait collection which he was to give to George III (Windsor Castle).7 He had a particular respect for Zoffany who had arrived in Florence in 1772. In 1774 Cowper commissioned from him portraits of himself and his fiancée, Hannah Gore (Firle Place). In June that year Zoffany sold Cowper four or five old master paintings, one of which was Raphael's Niccolini Madonna (Washington, NG), with which both Zoffany and Cowper are shown in Zoffany's Tribuna (Windsor), and Zoffany probably bought other paintings for him later. Cowper commissioned landscapes from Zuccarelli (Firle Place), Philipp Hackert (Frankfurt, Goethemuseum), and H.P. Dean. He helped other artists who passed through the city including Romney, Ozias Humphry and John Brown, and he assisted the architect Ebdon. With Zoffany's departure from Florence in April 1778 Cowper lost his advisor, though later that year he acquired the Holy Family by Fra Bartolommeo (Firle Place). In 1774 Cowper had met Hannah Gore, a lively, pretty young Englishwoman, whom he followed to Rome and eventually married in Florence on 2 June 1775. She bore him three sons and exercised a considerable fascination on male visitors, see Hannah Gore. When Cowper was made a Prince of the Holy Roman Empire in 1777, it was considered in some quarters as a compensation for his wife's liaison with the Grand Duke (Leopold I, the brother of the Emperor Joseph II), although Cowper had previously been on close terms with him. Through his good relations with the Hapsburgs, Cowper was able to support British interests in both Tuscany and Austria, which gave him a political power denied to the British resident,8 but his temperament was not naturally disposed to diplomacy and he was unable to exploit his position.  Cowper continued to collect pictures, commissioning work from the undistinguished Florentine painter G.A. Fabrini, who painted Cowper in the robes of the Bavarian order of S.Hubert (Accademia Etrusca, Cortona). Cowper's collection is listed in an inventory dated 1779, most of the items remaining identifiable.9 During the 1780s there was less artistic activity, though Plura made a bust of him which was shown at the RA in 1782 and H.D. Hamilton's double portrait of Lady Cowper and her sister (now lost) was shown at the RA in 1787. Cowper commissioned landscapes from Jacob More in 1784 and helped him to submit his Self-Portrait (Florence, Uffizi) to the Grand Ducal collections. Plans to return to England were made in 1781, when his children went to England with a Mrs Carder, but Cowper did not return until 1786. Despite giving George III a Raphael Self-Portrait (Royal Collection), he was unsuccessful in obtaining Horace Mann's post and he returned to Florence disillusioned. His visit to London renewed family contacts and he may have helped his step-nephew, Lord Spencer, and the Duke of Dorset to acquire paintings from Florentine collections. His last recorded purchases are a Nativity by Carlo Dolci (Cleveland) from the Gerini collection and a Helmbreker from the Marucelli sale in 1787. He died in Florence on 23 December 1789.
Cowper and Barclay were two Anglican clergymen in the Pretender's service. They had both been with the Jacobite court at Avignon in 1716 and were summoned to Italy to succeed Charles Leslie in June 1717, Barclay then being in Dijon and Cowper in Holland.1 Cowper set out from Rotterdam at the end of August and they had both arrived in Italy by 7 December, their travel expenses from Paris (400 livres each) being outstanding in January 1718.2 Cowper was not listed at Rome on 1 January (though Barclay was), but 'Dr Couper' was expected in Rome on 10 November 1718.3  In May 1721 Lord Rialton and a companion in Rome were helped in their search for antiquities by 'Dr Cooper of the Church of England' who was 'very knowing in this kind of learning' and invited them to attend Protestant service at the Pretender's palace.4 On 12 September 1726 the Pretender was forced to make 'Barkley' and 'Cowper', 'Anglican clergymen' leave Rome,5 and Cowper died within days of his arrival in Florence. Reporting his death, Colman, the British resident, described him as a Scotchman, 'a sort of Doctor of Law', in the Pretender's service.6 Stosch had described him as an Anglican high church minister.7
Lord Cowper travelled with Dr Joseph Atwell as his bear-leader. They reached Venice in December 1729 (see Atwell) and Cowper's intention to stay until the end of the Carnival was noted on 20 January.1 But that month he fell seriously ill and received by post a diagnosis and prescription from a British doctor, John Hollings.2 He was, however, determined to continue his tour and with the prescribed diet of 'asses milk' his recovery was complete by the time he had reached Rome. Stosch noted his arrival there on 16 February; on 30 March he had decided Cowper was a man of great merit, and on 28 May he reported his departure, 'a gentle docile creature'.3  His letters to his sister Lady Sarah say much about opera performances, and one records a lost portrait of Cowper by Rosalba Carriera which was sent by sea to England;4 his sister received it on 26 August and observed that 'if it was like him as I am told, he must have been extremely changed by his illness'.5 In Rome much time was spent studying antiquity and there were also excursions to Tivoli and Naples. From Rome Cowper and Atwell sailed to Leghorn before seeing Pisa, Lucca, Florence, Bologna, Parma, Milan, Turin and Genoa. Atwell's correspondence gives further details about the visit.

George Coxe was in Italy at the same time as his better known brother William. He had 'lately' returned to England from Italy in October 1785, when he was describing the country round Rome as 'a black bog'. He apparently returned immediately, as 'Dear Mr Coxe' met the Piozzis in Naples in the winter of 1785-6 and again in May 1786 at Bologna, where his ill health, however, was 'a drawback upon all our Comforts'.1 There was an incident between Coxe and an unamed English youth in Italy, mentioned by Mrs Piozzi in January 1786.2


A group of 53 of his Italian drawings, some dated 1746 (BMPL) and a Roman Sketchbook (YCBA) furnish the evidence for the Italian visit of Alexander Cozens. He had sailed from St Petersburg, where he had spent most of his life, to Leghorn and visited Elba, Spezia and Rapallo, but he stayed principally in Rome. 'I will studdy beauty of Form & injoy elegant Ideas', he confided; 'I will immure myself in solitude & paint ye Graces act Truth and contemplate Virtue'.1 He also produced two practical schemes of study. In the summer: 'every Morng with Sigr Giorgio [Rinaldo Giorgi?] to sketch & outl[ine] Lands[cape] from life /  then come home and studdy etching / then about for one hour ... of Mr Verney [Joseph Vernet] / then with Sigr Giorgio at the Capitoll / then for rest of ye afternoon with some landsk.[ape] / then sup / then in eveng Itall'. And 'before ye summer commences /  Soon in morn: outline Views / to Miss Bruce / dine & studdy with ye Glass &c at Capitoll /  to Verney / finish light &c of some outlines /  Itall'. On his way home through Germany in 1746 all Cozens drawings dropped from his saddlebag; some were found and purchased by his son, John Robert Cozens in Florence in 1776.2
Of a silent, hesitating disposition, and of grave manners',1 John Cozens set out with Richard Payne Knight in August 1776 to make a brief tour of the Swiss Alps before proceeding to Italy.2 Both were in Rome in November, and on the 27th Cozens was one of a large party of English artists met by Thomas Jones in the English Coffee House.3 It was presumably while on his way to Rome that he was able to acquire his father's lost drawings in Florence (see Alexander Cozens). Cozens's drawings of Rome and the Campagna are dated from April 1777 to 1778 and, particularly in a series of views of grottos, they displayed an original and dramatic sensibility. But he was also engaged in working up earlier compositions. He began the finished watercolours from the Swiss expedition and he was commissioned by Payne Knight to make large watercolours of Sicily from sketches made by Charles Gore and Philipp Hackert in 1777. By 1 June 1778 Cozens, not in good health, was staying in a villa outside the Porta Pia 'for the benefit of the Air', as Thomas Jones recorded. He explored the surrounding countryside riding 'on a jackAss which he had purchased for that purpose', while Jones, 'with a nice Poney', frequently accompanied him.4 On 8 April 1779 Jones noted that 'Little Cousins set off this day [from Rome] for England'.5 Cozens began his second expedition as draughtsman for William Beckford, his father's friend, for whom he had already executed some Italian views in 1780.6 Beckford's demanding nature and melancholy sensibility helped to bring out the deepest poetry in Cozens's work, as in his Storm over Padua (Tate Gallery) and Monte della Madonna with Petrarch's Residence (YCBA). The tour was brisk; within six weeks they went from Venice, via Padua, Bologna and Rome to Naples. There they were afflicted by malaria. On 14 July 1782 Thomas Jones found 'poor little Cousins' ill in bed with a fever, but he was recovered by 3 August.7 On 10 September Beckford departed 'leaving behind his Draughtsman Cousins Once more a free Agent and loosed from the Shackles of fantastic folly and Caprice'.8 Beckford was later to call Cozens an ungrateful scoundrel, though his reason for doing so remains obscure.9 Cozens made several excursions from Naples, including visits to Salerno and Paestum, where he was in November. In October he had spent a day with Sir William Hamilton who told Beckford 'the vermin plays a good stick on the violioncello', adding that 'he has made some charming sketches but I see by his book that he is indolent as usual'.10 His last Naples drawing is dated 9 December; on the 11th he paid the first of several visits to Allan and John Ramsay in Rome.11 He also saw Angelica Kauffman, Gavin Hamilton and Sir George Beaumont (whose drawings began to imitate the Cozens style). He finally left Rome on 15 September 1783, and he was talking to Thomas Jones in London on 19 November. Two of Cozens's grand tour sketchbooks of 1782-3 are now in the Whitworth AG, Manchester.12
Cradock-Hartopp and his wife arrived in Genoa early in November 1777 with a Mrs Chantrey and a Mr Palmer,1 and were in Rome by or before March 1778.2

Craggs was in Genoa and Turin, on his way back from Spain, in the summer of 1710;1 he is also said to have been in Turin as part of a grand tour (DNB).

Lord Cranstoun travelled with his tutor Thomas Robertson. Lord Lovelace accompanied them to Bologna, where he caught a fever, and they proceeeded without him to Rome by the beginning of July 1727.1 Cranstoun spent seven months in Rome before returning north; while in Florence he appeared as 'a person of perfect good breeding, & of very promising hopes'.2 He must then have returned to Rome, as in August 1728 Stosch wrote that Cranstoun had thrown himself into the arms of the Pretender out of infatuation for Lord Nithsdale's daughter.3 In 1728 Cranstoun was painted by Antonio David in Rome (priv. coll., on loan to the SNPG in 1964).
The Crasters travelled together to Italy; Olive Craster kept notebooks and (mostly undated) accounts.1 She listed craftsmen, artists and specialities, as at Bologna: 'sausages, gauses, oil cloth & Liquors made by Manudi the famous man, & a particular kind of lapdog, the hair very long & like silk but very dear'. Her accounts include payments for artificial flowers, sheet music, pins, snuffboxes, cameos, intaglios and essences, as well as two of the lapdogs.  In Rome in 1762 George Craster sat to Batoni in full regimentals (priv. coll.; Clark /Bowron 256) and in July 1762 as a pendant Nathaniel Dance painted Olive Craster with a pet squirrel on her wrist (priv. coll.).2 Dance had been apprehensive of this scheme: 'However, I had the courage to undertake it, and have had the good fortune to succeed better than my best friends expected'.3 The two portraits cost 61 scudi 5 paoli, with copies in miniature by signora Tibaldi at 32 scudi and 8 paoli (a scudo, it was noted, being worth 5 English shillings).
Sir Henry Crathorn of York' registered at the Collegio de' Nobili di S.Francesco Saverio at Bologna in May 1772, and at the Collegio S.Carlo at Modena in August 1773.1  He may have been the Crathorne in Florence on 11 June 17742 and the Crathorne who arrived in Rome with Father William Meynell in the autumn of 1774; the following winter Father Thorpe reported Crathorne's movements between Rome and Naples.3
The Italian travels of the brothers Craufurd are not well documented. James, known as 'Flesh', is said to have made the grand tour with his elder brother John 'Fish' Craufurd in 1760-1.1 He may have been the 'Jame Granfust' who lodged in the same house as Thomas Dundas in Venice in 1762.2 In April 1772 Mme du Deffand wrote that James Craufurd had arrived in Paris on his return from Italy,3 which suggests he may also have been the Mr Crawfurd seen by Mrs Home in Florence late in October 1771 and the 'Chauford' noted there on 26 October 1771.4
John Craufurd is said to have made a grand tour with his brother James in 1760-11 and he was wintering in Italy in 1761-2 for the sake of his health.2 The 'Granfurd-Inglese-28' staying on the Piazza Mignanelli in Rome in the spring of 1762 was probably the same as 'one Mr Craufurd', whom Horace Mann described as 'a very ingenious young man ... intimate with Voltaire and his library'; in June 1762 Mann gave him some Inigo Jones designs for Horace Walpole.3  'Fish' Craufurd, so named for his avid sense of curiosity, was a restless traveller; in September 1768 he planned to spend the winter at Naples, and in June 1770 he was en route to a spa near Venice.4 Madame du Deffand was fond of 'le petit Craufurd', while Voltaire, though 'penetré d'estime' for his visitor, was critical of his 'petites velleités de sortir de la vie, quand il ne s'y trouve pas bien'.5
At the beginning of December 1778 'Mr & the Miss Crawfurds' sailed from Genoa to Lerici with Sir George Strickland and his family.1 Two 'Miss Crawfords' ('fine young women...great friends of Capt. [Patrick] Brydone') were in Naples at the beginning of 1779, the guests of Mrs Hervey, wife of the Bishop of Derry.2 Mr Craufurd and his sisters left Rome in April, soon after Sir George Strickland.3 Mrs King and the two 'Miss Craufords' were in Venice on 19 May.4 One of the Miss Craufurds may have been the Annabella Crawford who m. General James Lockhart in Pisa in 1785; see Lockhart.
Her tour of northern Italy in 1785 and her later journey to Naples are described in the Memoirs of the Margravine of Anspach [1826],1 and her letters during her first tour were published in A Journey through the Crimea to Constantinople, in a series of letters from ... Elizabeth Lady Craven to... the Margrave of Brandenburg, Anspach and Bareith [1889]. On separating from her first husband in 1781, she went to France, taking their youngest son, Keppel (1779-1851). In October 1785 Horace Walpole was recommending her to Horace Mann as 'very pretty, has parts, and is good-natured to the greatest degree', despite having been 'infinitamente indiscreet.'2 In contrast, the Countess of Bristol said 'she is quite undone, and has not an atom of character left'.3 Lady Craven travelled from France to Italy with Keppel and Henry Vernon; they took a 'commodious house by the week' in Pisa and were suitably entertained in Florence. Venice was considered dismal with its 'innumerable gondolas floating on the water like so many coffins'.4 In 1786 Lady Craven presented Walpole with Reveley's drawing of the castle at Otranto, near Naples; Walpole was delighted and confessed (twenty-two years after his novel of that title) 'I did not even know that there was a Castle of Otranto'.5 She visited northern Italy at the beginning of 1789 with her 'brother', the Margrave of Anspach, and Keppel, and the three returned in November to spend the winter at Naples,6 passing through Florence on 18 November.7 The Margrave was recalled to Berlin on business in February 1790 thereby interrupting an idyll which Lady Craven sought to reproduce when in 1817 she built a villa overlooking the bay at Posilippo. Both she and Keppel Craven were buried in the British cemetery at Naples.8
Lord Craven's governor in Italy was Edward Holdsworth (whom Elizeus Burges mistakenly identified as William Oldisworth 'that celebrated Author of ye Examiner'), and they arrived in Venice in December 1719 with a Mr Campion, a Mr Traper [?], a Mr Dawkins and George Lockhart of Carnwath (1700-61).1 They were all in Padua on 20 December.2 Craven and 'sevl English Gentm' left Naples for Rome in March 1720;3 two months later Craven was expected in Florence.4
Lord Crawford was noticed in Rome sometime during the winter of 1785-6 by Henry Quin, who listed his name alongside that of Lord Sunderlin (Quin jnl.MSS).

Capt. Crawford son of a Scotch Member' was noticed by John Holroyd at Turin in July/August 1764,1 and John Morgan met 'Mr Crawford' at the Academy there.2 In May 1765 James Martin saw him among a group of English in Geneva.3 A Mr Crawford was elected to the Society of Dilettanti in 1765.


Crawley travelled with a governor, John Breval.1 In Rome Stosch had them watched: 'La conduite de Messrs. Breval et Crawley m'ayant paru fort equivoque, j'ai fait suivre leurs pas par mes emissaires, lesquels unanimement m'assurent que presque tous les jours ces deux Messrs. vont au Palais du Pretendt'.2 They spent about seven months in Rome, with a visit to Naples and Sicily.3 Turning north, they met an earlier acquaintance, Sir Edward Gascoigne, in Florence.4 Crawley and Gascoigne were among those to have engravings dedicated to themselves in Gori's Inscriptiones Antique in Etruriae Uribus Exstantes [1726-43].5
Crawley was sent to Italy in 1757 at the expense of the Dublin Society. His name was recorded by Hayward in Rome both in February and June 1758, indicating that he left Rome for some months;1 on 31 June 1758 Robert Mylne in Rome described Crawley as being both impudent and foolish.2 In September the Bishop of Ossory (Richard Pococke) reported on Crawley to the Dublin Society, 'if he does not return to Ireland I will repay the Society the eighty pounds they allowed. I find he goes on very well at Rome' (Strickland). Crawley was living in the Strada Felice in 1758 ('Gio Cuole scultore Eretico 25').3 On 24 January 1759 he was amongst the artists who settled the affairs of Jonathan Skelton after his death.4 Crawley does not appear to have returned to Ireland; after John Runciman's death in Naples in 1768 James Barry (who had arrived in Rome in October 1766) remembered that he had seen another artist 'helped out of this world, ... one Crawley, a sculptor'.5

In July 1717 the Pretender asked the Earl of Mar to send Robert Creagh, his secretary, to Urbino: 'Nairne is sick, and I have not a soul that can write French'.1 On 1 November Creagh received 500 livres to go to Italy; he had left France by the middle of the month and reached Urbino on 10 December with Sir Peter Redmond.2 The following April Creagh, smitten by an Italian singer, claimed he would marry her 'if he thought she would please the King'.3 In October 1718 Creagh (identified as Matthew,4 but presumably the same) went to Ferrara with James Murray (1690-1770) to prepare for the Pretender's wedding; on 10 November he wrote to his wife in Rome that after six weeks he still did not know when he would be able to return to her.4

The Creichton who passed through Capua with William Stanhope on 7 November 1753 and 12 April 1754, may have also been the Creichton in Capua on 23 March 17541 and the Richard Creichton who exported 50 paintings from Rome on 26 April 1754.



[c.1699-1700 Padua ('d. Petrus Champion Crespignus a.p. 48'; Andrich, 162)]
Philip Crespigny and his (second) wife were entertained by Sir John and Lady Dick at Leghorn (Dick corr.MSS, Crespigny, 6 Jun. 1776).
He spent the winter of 1787-8 in Rome before proceeding to Naples.1 On 2 May 1788 he attended a dinner in Venice with Lord Clifford.2
Although his name is variously written, it appears that Daniel Crespin spent a number of years in Italy, where he acquired the reputation of a respected connoisseur. Daniel Crespin was first listed in Italy at Capua on 1 June 1753.1 In 1760-1 he was lodging in the Strada Gregoriana in Rome with 'Pietro Stiner',2 doubtless the Peter 'Governor' Stephens with whom Crespin was mentioned at Rome in 1762-3 (see Stephens), and in July 1760 Benjamin West met Cardinal Albani in the house of 'Mr Crispigne', 'an English gentleman who had long resided at Rome'.3 Crespin was well informed about James Grant of Castle Grant's collecting in Italy, and when the latter returned home in 1760 he remained an important contact in Rome.4 Nathaniel Dance wrote that 'he brings every gentleman who comes here to see me and recommends me to them in the strongest manner'.5 In 1763 Lord Tavistock, writing to an inexperienced traveller, described Crespin and Gavin Hamilton as 'persons to get acquainted with in Rome'.6 James Martin called on him in Rome on 19 December 1763.7 While in Italy in 1761 Jacob Houblon had begun a correspondence (in Italian) with a 'Mr Crespiny'.8 In October 1762 James Adam consulted his 'friend' Crispin about a Levant expedition, and he was a 'worthy friend' to John Strange and John Dick.9 In London in 1771 Mrs Delany was shown paintings by Benjamin West and Angelica Kauffman 'by Mr Crispin, who I like extremely';10 Crespin had been an admirer of the 'little German Paintress' ever since her arrival in Rome age 19. In his will Daniel Crespin ('once of London, merchant') left 'the Cattle Piece painted in Rome by Londonio and also the Comick Muse painted by Angelica Kauffman' to Harriet Bowdler.11
Mr Cressener, who has been here some years, is lately gone to settle at Ancona. He was a wholesale grocer in London, and broke in the year 1727 with some Circumstances not much to his reputation. He intends to set up the Sugar-baking Trade there, & hopes to succeed better in that Business than he did in his own' (SP 99/63, f.226; Burges, 22 May 1733).
On 4 December 1716 in Genoa Cresswell was arrested for committing repeated acts of sodomy in public. 'He was immediately carried to the prison of the palace, with a young Genoese boy he had lately dressed up, and nobody is admitted to see him'. Henry Davenant, the new envoy, wrote that 'he had never heard of such a delinquent, however I have some hopes of stifling the process, in regard of the nation's honour'.1 He was probably the 'Creswell' reported at Naples in May 1718.2
Young rich Mr Crewe, a Maccarone'1 made his grand tour with Dr John Hinchliffe whose letters (Hinchliffe letters MSS) provide much of their itinerary. Batoni's portrait of Crewe (Clark/Bowron 248; priv. coll.) is said to be dated 1760, but Crewe and Hinchliffe came over the Brenner Pass in the autumn of 1761. They were conceivably the 'Odoardo Stanistholif' and 'Giovanni Crosré' who arrived in Venice on 12 October 1761; they certainly left Venice on 1 December with Captain Edward Hughes and sailed to Bologna in three days. The Abbé Grant met Crewe in Rome in February 1762.2 Crewe and Hinchliffe expressed 'reverence' for Horace Mann in Florence.3 They visited Venice for Ascension in 17624 and Crewe bought in Venice, presumably in 1762, Canaletto's own memento of England, the Whitehall and the Privy Garden.5 By 3 November 1762 they had left Turin for Lausanne.6 The following July James Martin met them in Paris,7 and by August they were back in England.8 See Hinchliffe. Crewe was an active collector: James Martin subsequently saw some 'beautiful views' destined for Crewe in James Forrester's studio in Rome, as well as Cignaroli's sketch for Hector taking leave of Andromache, at Vicenza9 (Sotheby's, 7 Dec. 1994).
Crisp described his tour in letters to his grandmother, Mrs Sheppard.1 His main subject was the presence of other English travellers, who were 'so numerous' in Rome at Easter 1739 'that my other Studies are much embarrassed by these idle tho' unavoidable Engagements' (18 Apr. 1739). He did not perceive this as a handicap and was particularly friendly with Sir Erasmus Philipps and Sir James Steuart. When there were few compatriots, as at Rome on 26 September 1739, he wrote with a touch of self pity that 'I go on here as well as I can among the Italians'. On 13 February 1740 he was still in Rome, but proposing to be home 'in June or July next', having visited Naples where he would stay 'about a fortnight' and 'thence to Leghorn, Florence, Bologna, Modena, Parma, and home as fast as I can'. Many of Crisp's observations will be found in other entries in this Dictionary. On his return he first lived at Hampton, surrounded by a collection of pictures and musical instruments arranged 'with the most classical elegance'.2

Clergyman, Spanish scholar and experienced traveller, Crofts guided Lord Fitzwilliam through France and Switzerland in 1764-6, and later through Italy in 1767-8.1 'I long to have him provided for', wrote Fitzwilliam, 'for I should be ashamed that he should quit me without anything'.2 In July 1769 Crofts was appointed Chancellor of the Diocese of Peterborough, which did not prevent him immediately setting out again, this time with Lord Carmarthen. Crofts was an occasional correspondent of William Hamilton, to whom he once expressed distrust of the antiquarian d'Hancarville and the 'seducing plausibility in all his schemes'.3 Croft's antiquities, coins and medals were sold in 1782 (Gerard, 26 Mar.).
With Henry Knight, who was in Florence by 6 February 1748,1 he presented to Cardinal Albani a letter of introduction from Horace Mann in March 1748.2 'Pietro Crommelin' and 'Nait' lodged together near the Piazza di Spagna in Rome at Easter 1748, with a James Murray and William Rouet.3
Crone, the landscape painter, a 'little crooked Irishman',1 arrived in Rome in 1755, having been sent to Italy by Philip Hussey.2 At Easter that year he was living in the Strada della Croce with the artists Jacob Ennis and James Forrester, and later (in 1758-9, 1762-3, and 1765-7) he was living with Matthew Nulty in a house near S.Giuseppe.3 Soon after his arrival in Rome, Crone studied under Richard Wilson until the Welsh artist's departure in 1756-7. Crone also studied at the Accademia del Nudo, Rome, with John Plimmer.4 Joseph Nollekens remembered that 'little Crone, the Landscape-draughtsman' was also 'employed to collect prints in Rome for Mr Mangin, of Dublin' and that he was 'much ridiculed by the natives on account of his deformity'5 (a drawing by Mengs acquired by Crone for Mangin is now in the NGI). In March 1759 Crone was described as a promising landscapist,1 but his 'progress in art was greatly impeded by the melancholy state of his health'; he had had an epileptic fit at the age of fifteen and he experienced a recurrence while copying at the Palazzo Barberini, where he fell from a scaffold.6 On 18 June 1762 Crone exported twenty-eight paintings, twenty three by 'Autori Morti'7 In 1764 he completed two landscapes commissioned by James Grant and left unfinished by John Plimmer at his death in November 1760. These, as well as drawings by William Mosman, were mentioned by Daniel Crespin to James Grant in March 1763: 'As soon as Mr Crone shall have finished the Landscapes, all shall be forwarded together';8 they were nearing completion in September 1763 and again in February 1764; by October they had been sent off.9 By then Crone had met the traveller James Martin. On 16 June 1764 they were together at Frascati in a party which included Colin Morison and Nathaniel Dance. Later on 22 September Crone walked with Martin to the Villa Madama to admire the views of Rome and from there to Ponte Molle.10 Martin admired his work: he thought Crone 'very clever in his Profession and must have great natural Genius ... He has chiefly studyed Claude Lorrain and I believe is reckoned to have a good Deal of his Manner. His chief Defects are, a too great Niceness in the small Parts of his Works as the Leaves etc; and somewhat a little unnatural in the Colouring; He is a most excellent Drawer of Landskip of which he has done several for the King. They have a remarkable soft mellowness in them whch is very pleasing. He is Irish and does Honour to his Country not only as a fine Painter but as a very Honest Man'.11 Gavin Hamilton came to share Martin's appreciation. On 10 February 1766 he wrote to Lord Palmerston saying that 'Mr Crone has finished one of his drawings which turns out extremely well and equal the great pains he has taken with it ... [he] presents his humble duty and will endeavour to get the drawing finished in about a month's time his common price is about 10 zachines a piece but he says that your Lordship was kind enough to offer him twelve in which he is extremely well contented'.12 According to Hayward, Crone left Rome with a Mr Moon, a miniature painter, in 1767.13
The following references may all refer to W.A. Crosbie of London, a subscriber to the Italian opera at the King's Theatre, who had known the 3rd Earl Cowper in Italy; in 1781 he had asked Cowper to find Italian singers for London; in 1787 Cowper sent over Giovanni Morelli, Crosbie's former footman who had become primo buffo at the Teatro della Pergola (see Gibson 1987, 239).'Mr Crosby from Florence' was seen in northern Italy by William Assheton (in either Parma, Modena or Bologna) early in November 1783;1 in December John Parkinson dined with Mr Crosbie at Merry's in Florence.2 This must have been the Crosbie (or Crosby), an acquaintance of Allan Ramsay, who arrived in Florence on 14 November 1783 and stayed until after April 1784.3
Crosbie was travelling with a Mr Watson [possibly Sir Charles Watson] and others; 'Crorsbie' and 'Walson' were listed in Florence on 3 June 1775,1 and 'Crostie' and 'Waston' arrived in Venice on 26 June.2




On 16 June 1716 Christopher Crowe wrote from Leghorn to Dr White Kennett, then Dean of Peterborough, that he 'should be very glad [the chaplaincy at Leghorn] might fall to my brother Benjamin's share who has been bred up in Queen's Colledge in Oxford that he might have an opportunity to see the world'.1 Benjamin Crowe was duly appointed chaplain to the British Factory at Leghorn.  In 1721 (probably November) Edward Wright saw in the house of Mr Crow 'then the chaplain of the factory', a fine collection of drawings, antique intaglio's, cameo's, and other curiosities. They were (I think) the collection of a late viceroy of Naples'.2 It may have been Benjamin (as opposed to his brother) who in July 1722 visited the Uffizi with Richard Rawlinson and who in September, with Henry Davenant and Castres, left Florence for Leghorn.3 Rawlinson referred specifically to 'the Revd.Mr Crow the Chaplain' when visiting the Leghorn consulate in July 1722: 'an upper room is sett apart for a chapell, in which are benches, a reading desk and a pulpit, here I heard an admirable discourse from the Revd Mr Crow the Chaplain'. Rawlinson had time to see Crowe's 'small and curious' collection of cameos and intaglios, though not his prints and drawings.4  The chaplain's salary (£200 p.a. in 1705) was paid from a small levy on goods brought to Leghorn in British ships and from c.1725 this was a source of friction among the merchants. From 1727 to 1729 Crowe was acting as an unpaid chaplain;5 on 20 February 1729, 'not finding sufficient encouragement to continue the exercise of his Holy Function amongst us', he returned to England.6  Crowe returned to Italy in 1733-4 as travelling tutor to Sir Hugh Smithson (later 1st Duke of Northumberland), see Smithson. They were together in Florence, Venice and Rome, but in June 1734 Crowe and Richard Pococke visited Padua from Venice, apparently without Smithson.7 Crowe subsequently corresponded for many years with Alessandro Galilei in Florence.8
Christopher Crowe was already a merchant in Leghorn before his appointment as English consul in 1705.1 In addition to his consular duties he acted as an intermediary for British collectors. In 1709 Vanbrugh required him to negotiate the purchase of statues for the saloon at Blenheim: 'What is to be desir'd of Mr Crow is: That he'll give himself the trouble of steping over to Florence to treat for these statues'.2 In 1714 the Earl of Strafford asked Crowe to supervise the shipping of some bronze statues by Soldani and to order columns and pedestals of Carrara marble for Wentworth Castle.3 In May 1715 Crowe sent a copy of the Wrestlers (Uffizi) to James Stanhope and with it 'a brass faun of which I beg your Lady's acceptance it being the onely one in Italy that's left of that famous Master Domenico'.4 It is probable that Crowe travelled widely in Italy in his role as agent. Crowe's marriage in 1715 to Lady Baltimore, a divorced Catholic, impeded his prospects as consul, and the following year he returned to England (see Charlotte, Baroness Baltimore). In 1722 Crowe acquired Kiplin Hall in North Yorkshire where the paintings included his portrait (as a virtuoso) by Trevisani and four views of Venice by Luca Carlevaris (two sold Christie's, 26 Nov. 1971). Eighty pictures, mostly Venetian, north Italian, Flemish and Dutch, were listed at Kiplin Hall in 1771.3
In June 1702 Crowe and Bennett Shallet, coming from Catalonia, were taken by Humphrey Chetham from Leghorn to Florence, where they stayed '6 Days in seeing Curiosities'.1 They were in Padua on 19 July, travelling to England.2
He was posted to Genoa in 1705 'without a [diplomatic] character' to observe the Catalan revolt and to report on naval movements; when he returned to Genoa in 1706 it was with a commission from the titular King of Spain (Horn, 1:73).
Crowle was in Naples at the beginning of November 17611 and he arrived in Rom  with a Mr Bowers on 19 March 1762.2 He sat to Batoni that year (Clark/Bowron 240; Louvre), as did his friend Lord Tavistock who, in England in November 1762, commended Crowle to his father as having been 'very civil to me in Italy. He is not very wise but an inoffensive good humoured lad'.3 Crowle left Turin on 4 August 1762 'on his way to France'4 and was in Paris in July 1763.5
Crowley's family' moved in Jacobite circles in Rome; on 2 February they dined at Sir Thomas Stradling's and later that month Dr James Irwin was said to be 'preengaged' with Crowley (Sinclair jnl.MSS, 2, 13 Feb. 1738).
Cruise and 'Mellish' were seen by John Cotes at Naples and Rome in the early summer of 1772,1 and Patrick Home also noticed them together.2
As governor to George and James Brudenell, Cuffand had frequent meetings with their cousin, the Duke of Shrewsbury, in Rome and Venice, once complaining to him of 'both his pupils' hours, and of Mr. Bru[denell's] carriage'. Shrewsbury meanwhile made Cuffand a witness to his will and entrusted him with it in Venice in July 1705 (Shrewsbury Jnl., 29 Oct. 1703, 21 Sep. 1704, 3 Jul. 1705).



George Cuitt was sent to Italy with the young architect Thomas Harrison by Sir Thomas Dundas.1 Cuitt appears to have stayed in Rome, where he is recorded sharing rooms with Harrison in 1770 and 1775, see Harrison.


A Suffolk couple, 'very pleasant people', Mr and Mrs Cullum provided welcome company in Naples for J.B.S. Morritt; 'being thoroughly English [they] make no disagreeable variety in the circle we visit'.1 In May 1796 a 'Mr Colum Inglese Nobile' was in Venice with his nephew, travelling from Florence.2 'Angela M.d Culeun Inglese' was in Padua on 16 May 1796, travelling with 'Frederick Matthieu'[?] from Venice to Vienna.3 Travel diaries of the Cullum family of Hardwick from the period 1767-1832 are deposited in Bury St Edmunds public library (MS Mun. Rm. E.2/44/1-67).
George Cumberland first went to Italy in 1785 after he had obtained his financial independence. He was already well aware of the activities of British artists in Rome at that time through his correspondence with James Irvine in Rome which had begun in 1780, and in 1784 he had helped Robert Fagan in Rome with his finances.1 On 5 December 1785 in Florence Henry Quin noted that 'the young Englishman I took for a Painter is Mr Cumberland'; on 28 December Cumberland had 'just arrived' in Rome from Florence, and on 5 January 1786 Cumberland with Quin met Irvine and H.D. Hamilton.2 Cumberland also met the artists Grignion and Tresham and the collector Colonel John Campbell in Rome, who were all subsequently referred to as his acquaintances.3 He later asserted that he would have bought Raphael's Villa if Cardinal Doria had not already bought it when it was for sale in 1786.4 In August 1786 he was in Switzerland with Charles Long.5 In 1787 Cumberland eloped with Mrs Elizabeth Cooper, the wife of his London landlord. They were in Frankfurt in June, Verona in September and Milan in October. The following month they reached Rome and it must have been on this second visit that Cumberland spent 'several' winters in Rome enjoying the company of the young English artists Deare, Robinson and Grignion.4 In December 1787 he was corresponding with Sir William Hamilton concerning the creation of a museum of casts from the best bas-relievos in order to 'enlarge the confined ideas of our artists',6 a project which became his Thoughts on Outline Sculpture [1796]. He was also concerned with the exemption from duty of British artists' works coming from Italy to England.7 In February he went to Paris to reach a settlement with Mr Cooper, whose wife meanwhile stayed with James Byres in Rome writing regularly to Cumberland in a semi-literate but lively style. On 10 May 1788 Byres wrote to Cumberland congratulating him on a satisfactory settlement.  In July 1788 the Cumberlands were staying at Lerici for three months in the summer, and Cumberland told his brother (12 July 1788) that 'his wife' was expecting his child in October when they proposed to be in Rome. On 12 October he was advising his brother to come to Italy, where in Naples or Rome one could live like a Gentleman for £100 a year. While he remained on good terms with British artists (on 11 March 1789 he dined with Hewetson in Rome), and commissioned at least a Perseus and Andromeda from Irvine,8 Cumberland apparently preferred to buy old master paintings and prints; there was a well preserved Leonardo of four figures which he later thought he could sell for £2000, perhaps to the Empress of Russia,9 and the antiquary James Clark in Naples obtained prints for him.10  On his return to England, sometime in 1790, he continued to correspond with British artists in Rome, including Deare, Grignion, Skirving, Fagan and Irvine. He wrote a biography of the engraver Bonasoni [1793] and An Essay on Collecting Works of the Engravers of the Italian School [1827]. He sold his choice collection of Bonasoni prints to the British Museum in 1827, and his other Italian engravings to the Royal Academy.
The Duke of Cumberland made two visits to Italy, accompanied by his morganatic wife Lady Anne and a large following which included his wife's sister, Lady Elizabeth Luttrell, and brother, James Luttrell. Horace Mann described them as 'the travelling Court', having already identified the Duke as 'the royal idiot'.1 King George III, the Duke's brother, wished the Duke and Duchess to travel as the Count and Countess of Dublin and to receive no honours from foreign courts, but his wishes were not willingly observed. The Cumberlands were to receive a mixed reception abroad. English visitors and residents were disparaging, particularly Mann and Lady Mary Coke,2 but Pietro Verri found the Duke very lively and a bit eccentric, and the Duchess educated but very preoccupied with etiquette.3 They were an odd couple and were dominated by Lady Elizabeth Luttrell who, according to Alberico Belgioioso, was an intelligent and brilliant woman, but a republican.4  On 26 October 1773 the party arrived at Verona, where they attended the Caccia di Tori at the Arena,5 and they went on to stay four months at Milan at private apartments in the Palazzo Castelbarco.6 They had arrived during the Carnival and there were many receptions, balls and concerts, both public and private. At the Palazzo Belgioioso the Duke played music in the presence of the composer Giovanni Battista Sammartini. He would often spend his evenings at the Palazzo Litta playing cards with the Marchesa Litta's daughters and the Contessa Castiglioni, to whom he presented a harpsichord. His conduct attracted such comment that by mid-December the Duke was considering leaving Milan, and it was questions of etiquette which finally caused his departure at the end of February. They arrived in Rome on 6 March and took up lodgings at a palace near the church of SS.Trinita in the Strada Condotti.7 The Pope treated them indulgently. He granted three audiences to the Duke (at which he was introduced by Thomas Jenkins) and arrangements were made for the Duchess to meet him 'dans quelque jardin et comme par hasard'.8 He commanded that the cupola of St Peter's should be illuminated in the Duke's honour on Low Sunday and ordered that presents should be given him. The Duke took a particular interest in the ceremonies of Holy Week. Cardinal de Bernis found the Royal couple 'très affables, fort ouverts et très peu politiques',9 and although he expected royal treatment, the Duke had no desire to maintain royal dignity. Father Thorpe described several episodes which led the Romans to suspect the Duke might be 'deficient in good breeding'. At a public concert the Duke 'would have taken a seat & played among the Musicians, if his friends had not withheld him by shewing him the impropriety of it'; he had 'afforded great diversion' to the Romans by attempting to drive a phaeton, with one of the horses lame, in the Piazza of St Peter's; when he went to St Peter's to see the illumination of the Passion Cross, he had suddenly disappeared, finally to be found 'covering the star of his breast with one hand, & with the other leading La Marchese [sic] Massimi about the more retired parts of that large Church'.10 The antiquary Orlandi escorted him round Rome and the Duke was reported to have sat 'assiduously' to Hugh Barron for his portrait (untraced),11 but no other work of art appears to have been acquired in Italy.  The Duke and Duchess were expected to arrive in Naples early in March, and they were also supposed to visit Genoa,12 but they embarked at Civitavecchia in a Papal frigate for Toulon and travelled via France back to England. The Duke sent back presents (through Jenkins) to the the Commander of the Papal fleet and to Principe Aldobrandini and his wife, the Marchesa Massimi.  The Duke and his wife returned to Italy for a brief visit in 1785. They landed at Naples on 14 December 1785 and stayed four months,13 the Duke telling his brother, the Prince of Wales, that 'the Operas are the only Amusements'.14 They went on to Rome, where they arrived before 15 April and stayed a month in the palace of the Marchese Nunez in the Strada Condotti.15 While Cardinal de Bernis suggested that 'nous aurions pu nous consoler d'être privés de cet honneur',16 he nevertheless was one of their hosts. Pope Pius VI gave two audiences to the Duke and met the Duchess. On 15 May they left for Florence, where they stayed for a week at Megit's17 and went on to spend a night at Bologna.18 The Duchess then went alone to Modena, arriving unannounced on 26 May; she paid a visit at Court and left the following morning to join her husband19 at Leghorn. They sailed for Marseilles, although the Duchess was reported to have returned to England by land, via Savoy and Lyon.20
Ensign Cumming was in Florence on 28 March 1771 (and he was probably also the 'Comming' listed in Florence on 23 March 1771).1 An Italian travel diary for 1770-1 is among the Cumming of Altyre MSS (NLS).



In the 1690s Alexander Cunningham had travelled with John, Marquess of Kintyre and Lorne, and other charges. He was in Rome in 1700 before being sent to Paris as a military observer for William III (DNB).  He returned to Italy in 1701 with Nicholas Leake and William Moncrief. In Rome Robert Sharpe observed that he would 'prove that atheists arguments conclude against themselves';1 he was still in Rome in April 1702.2 By July he was back in Padua (for his third visit) with Leake and Moncrief.3 In 1710 he accompanied Viscount Lonsdale ('One of the hopefullest young gentlemen I have ever known') around Europe for two years.4 They passed through Holland and Berlin, and entered Italy after spending fourteen days quarantine in the lazzaretto near Verona because of the plague then prevalent in Germany.5 From Padua6 they went to Venice (via Verona),5 leaving after the Carnival on 21 March for Rome. From Rome they intended visiting Naples in April and May. Back in Rome between June and August Lord Lonsdale was frequently with John Bellings.7 In September 1711 they turned north, visiting Florence and Milan (being 'the only men of the British nation at that time in those parts'). Charles Baldwyn noticed Lonsdale in Genoa on 13 November,8 and they were proposing to stay in Turin 'till Christmas'.9 Cunningham and Lonsdale had returned by 13 March 1712 to Venice, where they met Cunningham's former charge Lord Lorne, now Duke of Argyll; they had left Venice by 18 March.10 By 30 April they were in The Hague, intending to be in England in June.11  In 1715 Cunningham was appointed 'Resident for King George to the most Sereen Republique of Venice'.12 He arrived in Venice via Padua13 on 4 December. He was to contest his recall in June 1719, but he eventually left Venice on 5 November, overlapping for a few weeks with his successor Elizeus Burges.14
Edward Cunningham was taken as a child to Italy, following the failure of the Jacobite rebellion in Scotland in 1745. He may have lived with his father in Bologna and Parma before he began his studies under Mengs in Rome in 1757, one of six Scottish pupils introduced to the master by Andrew Lumisden. By 1762 he was established at Parma, where there is a nude study by him dated 1763 in the Accademia di Belle Arti.1 Cunningham is also said to have worked in the studio of Francesco de Mura at Naples (DNB), and he subsequently worked in Venice.
William Cunningham was in Florence among the 'many people here from Minorca' in August 1756.1 Wounded at the siege of Minorca 27 June 1756, he was returning home with his wife when Lady Mary Wortley Montagu met them at Venice in November: though 'in a weak State of Health' and at times being 'perillous', he was determined to proceed to England.2  He may also have been the Mr Cunningham who, along with other officers from Mahon, visited Naples from Rome in July 1746, see Clerk 1746. He may also have been the Colonel Cunningham who spread reports in Florence of Mann's forthcoming promotion, a rumour he had heard at Gibraltar, and decoration with the Order of the Bath.
Colonel Cunningham was in Florence in November 1763, dining at Horace Mann's with James Martin; Martin met him again in December in Rome and Naples.1 Cunningham had travelled from Rome to Naples with a Mr Richards (see Richards 1763-4) and they had passed through Capua on 25 December 1763.2 He was probably the Colonel Cunningham seen by John Holroyd in Turin in July/August 1764.3 He may also have been the Cunningham whose portrait was drawn by Patch in Florence.4

Already a physician of some repute, Cunyngham accompanied the young Allan Ramsay (ten years his junior) on his first visit to Italy. His travel diary, which he illustrated with sketches of costumes, provides some details of their tour.1 They had resolved to speak only Italian in Italy 'as we had been well founded in it before we left Edinburgh'. In Genoa Cunyngham was robbed by a servant who was subsequently sent to the gallies for life. They sailed for Leghorn, but a storm drove them into the coast near Pisa; on 1 October they finally arrived in Leghorn, where they found five thousand Spanish troops in good order after their conquest of Naples. From 5 to 21 October they stayed in Florence before setting off for Rome. They stayed in the Tre Re, before moving to 'genteel apartments' on the Piazza di Spagna. 'For near three weeks Mr Ramsay and I did little else than scamper about every day all over the streets of the City of Rome'. They observed the Papal Lottery that was said to bring in some £10,000 to the Pope's Treasury, and fell in with many gentlemen from the Jacobite Court: old Lord Winton and James Murray (the Jacobite Earl of Dunbar), Captain William Hay and the Pretender's doctors, Robert Wright and James Irwin. They were presented to the young Stuart princes at the Villa Ludovisi by Dunbar, and they attended a great Ball given by Cardinal Corsini for Prince Charles's birthday on 31 December at which, wrote Cunyngham, 'most of the English then at Rome were present'. On 27 December Cunyngham was introduced to the Free Masons by Lord Winton, the Great Master of the Lodge, and in January 1737, with Ramsay, was formally admitted. On the first day of the Carnival (23 February) they witnessed the execution of the Abbé Count Trivilli who had written 'a satyr against the Pope and Camera'.2 Dr Wright took Cunyngham to see the manuscripts in the Vatican Library and Ramsay introduced him to Camillo Paderni, the pupil of Imperiali (then Ramsay's master), who gave him a sketch of an Adoration of the Shepherds (Prestonfield). He attended the French Academy with Ramsay (they both had letters of introduction to Vleughels, the Director), and Cunyngham noted that there were not more than 'two or three excellent drawers or modellers in clay among the fifty who were at work'.3 A sketchbook of Cunyngham's was amongst the Prestonfield MSS. When Cunyngham left Rome after five months, he reckoned that his 'whole expence' there, including 'Music masters, and all the things I bought (pictures, prints, seals, &c.) cost me about £30'; he had had 'more instruction than in any five months of my life past'.4  He left Allan Ramsay and Rome on 17 March and set out for Milan. At Tolentina his lodgings had once been a house built for a Cardinal; he described Papal troops guarding the church of the Santa Casa and the Monastery at Loreto, and recalled the battlefield of Parma where the Austrians and French had fought in 1734. In Turin he saw the elaborate preparations for the forthcoming marriage of the King of Sardinia, and the Marquis de Castello took Cunyngham to see the arrival of the young King Charles Emmanuel III and his Queen on 13 April.

With James Dalrymple and the bear-leader John Wolf [possibly J.G. Woolfe] he came to Venice for the Carnival in October 1712;1 they also visited Padua together.2 The following June Cunynghame was in Naples, which he left for Rome in the train of the 1st Marquess of Annandale and '3 other North British gentm.'3
Cunynghame had made a grand tour after his father's death in October 1767, but it is not known if he then visited Italy. He again went abroad after the death of his first wife in 1771, visiting Paris and Vienna as well as Italy,1 where he does not appear until 1774. With John Blagrove and Steddy Grinfield he gave a 'sontuosa festa di ballo' at Siena in January 1774,2 and in March he was in Naples,3 where he met Patrick Home.4 In April, together with other 'English Gentry', he was kept waiting for two hours in a Vatican antechamber, only to be denied a papal audience.5 In May he lodged in Venice with seven other compatriots,6 and on 18 May the Abbé Grant wrote that Cunynghame had returned home to get himself chosen for the next parliament.7
By November 1791 'Mr Curry, a civil Irishman' was in Leghorn keeping a hotel which commanded a fine view of the sea, the port, and the island of Gorgona',1 but in January 1793 the hotel was described as 'indifferent'.2 When the French army came to Leghorn, Curry, the Irish innkeeper, was 'the only Englishman who staid', wrote Lady Berwick, 'and he desired he might see the General & tell him his mind, a conversation ensued and a curious one I hear it was, in which it was agreed that he was to remain in his Inn unmolested. Barbara [Lady Berwick's maid] is disturbed for the virtue of his Daughters she has very high ideas of the prowess of the french army in that way...'.3

Curtis (the name also given as 'Cotes' or 'Cortis') travelled with Sir John Rawdon and Captain Bates. He met Lady Pomfret in Siena1 and all three were later in Turin.2


Cuthbert 'Broken down with ye Gout' travelled in Italy with 'Mr Minett - His Brothr. Master of the Dover Pacquet boats - Underbred'.1 Cuthbert was stricken with gout at Naples in March,2 and on 18 April 'Cuttlert' and Minett were in Florence.3
His signature 'Charles Cutler & Co.' appears on two memorials from British merchants in Naples in 1765 and 1767.1 In 1779 his ship the Rambler was captured by the French; in November 1787 he was a trustee to the estate of George Tierney, another British merchant at Naples.2 Charles Cutler subscribed to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave in 1790. He was probably the Cutler recorded as a banker at Naples in 1784 and 1786.3


Lord Daer's unmarried older brother had died of consumption in November 1794 and two unmarried younger brothers were to die of yellow fever, which suggests that he too travelled to Italy for his health. Daer and a Mr Beach attended the evening concert given by Richard Wynne and his sisters in Florence on 21 April 1796.1 He was doubtless the 'Lord Daar', described by William Hamilton as his cousin, who travelled from Rome to Naples in September 1796 with [Robert?] Ferguson.2 He died in Florence on 9 July 1797.3
He is said to have 'figured in Rome as count Dagnia, and he was patronised by Earl Mellor [Malton?], afterwards Earl of Rockingham, the Earl of Denbigh, and the Duke of Cleveland'.1 His niece (née Deer, later Mrs Terence Knight, d. 1806/7) owned a bronze bust of him executed in Rome, and a nephew, the Rev. Griffith of Newcastle, may have had some curiosities Dagnia had collected on his travels; his niece published privately The adventures of Jemmy Gosemore Dagnia.  'M. Dania Anglois' ordered three paintings from Vernet in Rome in 1738.2 Dagnia may have met William Windham in Rome, since each subsequently owned the other's portrait.3
A very pleasing young man, gay and cheerful in his manner', he was on the Continent with his tutor William Garthshore by May 1790. They spent about a year at Dresden before going on to Italy.1 They were in Rome on 19 November, when they called on Lord and Lady Camelford, and left shortly afterwards to visit Naples for two months.2 Dalkeith wrote from Naples on 3 December 1791 mentioning that he had met in Rome two other travellers from Dresden, Lord Boyle and his tutor Robert Dodge, and that he was about to inspect the flowing lava from Vesuvius; he asked for letters to be directed 'Chez Mr Jenkins à Rome'.3 In Naples Lady Malmesbury found Dalkeith 'a natural, good-humoured boy', but noted on 3 January 1792 that '[he] has never been well since he chose to lie down and sleep upon the hot lava upon Vesuvius. He is a very pleasant, comical young man.'4 At Rome in April, Dalkeith sat to Hugh Robinson for his portrait, which Sarah Bentham saw in the artist's studio in December 1793.5 The following month Dalkeith and Garthshore were in Venice.6
Accompanied by James Chesnutt, Lord Dalkeith went abroad on his travels in the summer of 1712. In March 1713 his mother was still undecided about credit for them in Italy.1 William Kent reported that Dalkeith was in Rome by 3 December 1713, at the same time as [John] Molesworth (whom Dalkeith may have accompanied from Florence) and Gilbert Elliot. They were still in Rome on 26 January.2 Dalkeith and Thomas Coke of Norfolk were in Naples on 13 March 1714,3 when Coke's accounts show payments to Dalkeith's servants.4 Dalkeith, Chesnutt and Elliot were next in Padua before July.5 Dalkeith's bankers' letters indicate that by July 1714 he was in Geneva, intending to reside some time at Vienna.1

Dallaway was chaplain and physician to Sir Robert Liston's embassy at Constantinople. On his return journey in 1796 he visited Leghorn and Rome,1 going on to Verona, where he arrived on 16 April; he was still there on the 20th.2
The 'Diary of a journey from Valdagno to Genoa and thence to Switzerland' in 1795 by 'Downey' or 'Dawnay', is listed in the Warwick RO (CR 1841/60); this was presumably the Mr Dalnay who accompanied Francis Newdigate and his wife in Italy in 1793-5; see Francis Newdigate.

Sir Hew made a grand tour in 1739-40.1 He sat to Domenico Dupra (priv. coll.), presumably in Rome,2 and between March 1741 and May 1742 Robert Rutherfurd wrote four letters from Genoa concerning the shipment for Dalrymple of two cases of (unspecified) pictures and four marble tables from Leghorn.3
He arrived in Venice for the Carnival in 1712 with Sir James Cunynghame and John Wolf,1 and the same three were in Padua in November.2 The following July Dalrymple was in Venice with Lord Herbert, Michael Newton and Hugh Bethel.3
He travelled in Italy for a year after he had accompanied Lord Lexinton's embassy to Vienna in 1700; DNB.
Described by Voltaire (whom he met in December 1771) as 'un Ecossais modeste, chose assez rare; jeune homme simple et même un peu honteux, avec beaucoup d'esprit; philosophe comme Spinoza, doux comme une fille',1 Lord Dalrymple was in Naples during the winter of 1776-7. Henry Swinburne recorded a grand dinner he gave in January, followed by a puppet show and conversazione, and in February he saw Dalrymple at a dinner given by Lady Orford, and joined him on a visit to Portici, where an excavation was about to be made.2 Dalrymple was in Rome by 1 April, where Thomas Pelham (later 2nd Earl of Chichester) thought he would probably remain for most of the summer. Later that month they visited Tivoli, Albani and Frascati with Lord John Pelham Clinton, James Byres acting as their antiquarian. Dalrymple and Pelham returned to Tivoli only a few days later. They were so delighted with the environs of Rome that 'had he [Dalrymple] not engaged apartments for the Ascension at Venise; we should (I believe) have spent a fortnight or three weeks together ... at a villa which Card'l. Conti had offered to me ... he [Dalrymple] is much the most agreeable Englishman that I know in Italy, rather reserved, & little known but by those who have the pleasure of his intimate Acquaintance.'3 On 9 July Dalrymple was in Paris on his way home.4

He met Lord St Asaph in Florence in the autumn of 1782,1 and was still there on 7 December.2
Dalton was in Rome by 29 June 1718, when the Jacobite Francis Panton described him as an inveterate whig who had stayed at Rheims; his 'vanity and emptiness' made him unreliable though he alleged he knew 'the characters of most of the [Jacobite] Court'. He was in Padua in March 1719 with Sir Carnaby Haggerston and John Jackson,2 who had both been in Naples the previous May.
Richard Dalton began his career as a painter, but he became an antiquarian-dealer of repute, principally through his activities as Librarian to George, Prince of Wales, subsequently King George III. While his elder brother John (b. 1708-9) had followed their father to Queens' College, Cambridge, Richard was apparently apprenticed to a coach painter at Clerkenwell.  He first travelled to Italy to continue his studies in 1739, working initially, according to Oretti, at Bologna. By 1741 he was studying in Rome under Masucci and had come to specialise in highly finished red chalk drawings after classical statues (of which a series, dated 1741-2, is at Windsor).1 Lady Pomfret mentioned that in March-May 1741 Dalton was executing copies from the antique both for herself and Lord Brooke; he was also to copy Raphael's Galatea for Lady Hertford, whose patronage proved, however, unreliable.2 By July 1741 Dalton's pursuit of his studies was balanced by an interest in dealing, particularly in prints; he had already sold a 'fine collection', partly from that of Francesco Imperiali, to Lord Lincoln (and he evidently knew Sir Erasmus Philipps who probably acquired the collection of drawings later owned by Lord Milford).3 By May 1743 Dalton was telling Horace Mann of a Raphael which was to be sold from the Cybo collection.4 Dalton may have had business in Venice, as Clephane's letter book records a letter of 7 August to 'Mr Smith at Venice for Dalton', which was perhaps an introduction.5  Little is known about Dalton's activities after his return to London later in 1743. In 1747 he travelled to Rome again, with the artist Thomas Patch: in 1749-50 they were with Joseph Wilton, Simon Vierpyl, James Basire and Matthew Brettingham in the Palazzo Zuccari. By November 1748 Dalton had secured through Mann an introduction to Cardinal Albani6 and he came to know Robert Wood and the young Joshua Reynolds.7 In 1749 Dalton was taken by Roger Kynaston and John Frederick on their tour of Sicily and in May their vessel encountered that of Lord Charlemont and his party: Dalton was invited to join them as travelling draughtsman.8 The party travelled by way of Malta to Constantinople and the Levant, returning by way of Greece. The drawings Dalton then made (BMPL, Windsor Castle and elsewhere) are of historical importance as the earliest visual records of a number of monuments. Seventy-nine would be published successively in Dalton's Musaeum Graeceum et Aegyptiacum or Antiquities of Greece and Egypt of 1751 and further publications of 1752, 1781 and 1790, and reissued in his Antiquities and Views in Greece and Egypt... of 1791. Charlemont was not associated with these publications and seems to have broken with Dalton after their return to Rome in March 1750. Dalton was certainly in England by April 1751.9  The publication of his drawings of Greek and Egyptian antiquities was clearly intended to further his reputation as an antiquary and thus his practice as a dealer; and in 1754 he advertised that casts from the antique, prints after Raphael, etc. were available at his lodgings in Great Ryder Street, St James's.10 Dalton is known to have been patronised by Frederick, Prince of Wales and in 1755 he was appointed Librarian to his son George, Prince of Wales, later King George III, an appointment which was probably owed to the 3rd Earl of Bute. Dalton's position was soon regarded with jealousy by such potential rivals as Robert Adam.  Dalton's third visit to Italy in 1758-9 was a direct result of the determination of both the Prince and Lord Bute to enrich the royal collection: his brief was to secure medals, drawings and prints for the Prince, and for Bute, and pictures for Sir Richard Grosvenor, 7th Bt. The expedition is graphically described in letters to both Grosvenor and Bute.11 Dalton travelled through Germany to Bologna, reporting on his journey to both Bute and Grosvenor on 27 June: by 4 July he had secured a group of pictures for Grosvenor, including two ascribed to Ludovico Carracci. On 8 July he reported to Grosvenor about sales from the Arnaldi collection at Florence, where he intended to spend a fortnight: he planned to buy two ovals by Maratti (priv. coll.). Meanwhile, on the Prince's behalf he was examining the Stosch collection of medals, as Bute was informed on 15 July. By 16 September Grosvenor could be told that the Marattis and other pictures from the Arnaldi collection had been secured: Dalton also reported on the activities of Lady Orford, William Kent (the dealer) and Charles Compton (later 7th E. of Northampton). On 19 September Dalton informed Bute that he had completed the process of checking the Stosch collection, submitting a list of duplicates which were available for Bute. Back at Bologna on 8 October, Dalton reported to Grosvenor on an unproductive visit to Parma, where he greatly admired works by Correggio, and a number of purchases from unspecified Bolognese collections: a later list shows that 49 pictures in all were purchased for Sir Richard at Bologna. Letters of October and November to Bute establish that Dalton was buying drawings both for him and the Prince, including a group of Guercinos from Casa Gennari, and the Baruffaldi collection of miniatures. A final letter of 28 November to Grosvenor reports that William Kent (the dealer) had secured the remainder of the Arnaldi collection. Eight further letters to Bute document Dalton's activities on the Prince's behalf. By 23 December he had seen the Stosch drawings and heard that a large collection had been secured by a rival: meanwhile Mann had alerted him to the availability of Beccafumi's cartoons for pavements in the Duomo at Siena from the Spannocchi collection.  Dalton also took a close interest in the work of English artists in Rome: Skelton had noted that Dalton planned to take a drawing by him to England in December 1758. Bute was sent a resumé of the activity of several painters on 3 February 1759, when Dalton planned to visit Naples. He may have been in Rome on 12 February when he sent forty paintings (mostly copies of old masters and modern paintings) to Florence,12 and he was certainly in Rome on 3 March when he intended to visit Siena to negotiate for the Spannocchi cartoons. From Rome on 10 March, Dalton reported that an exceptional intaglio of Isis was available from the Bracciano collection. Subsequently, as he wrote on 31 March, Dalton examined in detail the drawings owned by Cardinal Albani. By 8 May, when Dalton was in Bologna, his opinion of the collection was less than favourable and he was in pursuit of two 'small but choice' Bolognese collections: it is clear that he was rattled by the fact that John Thomas Seton had secured the Hamerani collection of drawings for the Prince. In the final letter of the series, sent from Venice on 25 May, a letter from Seton was transcribed and Dalton referred to drawing collections in Venice, singling out those of Joseph Smith and Zanetti. Parallel with his activities for the Prince of Wales, Dalton continued to secure pictures for Grosvenor: 37 were bought in Rome in 1759 (cf. n12) followed by five others at Bologna in May. While in Italy, Dalton spent £2,454 15s. for Sir Richard, and received some £2,786 for the account Bute used for the Prince. He was due in London at the end of August. With the succession of King George III in 1760, Dalton's position as his librarian became correspondingly more significant. While the impetus for the King's architectural and artistic activities came from Bute's knowledge and influence, Dalton was to have a key role in what can be seen as an acquisitive campaign. His position was recognised, for instance by Mann who, replying to a suggestion from Walpole that he might make purchases for the King, observed that Dalton and others would want to 'keep the management in their own hands'.13 Dalton was regarded with particular suspicion by Robert Strange, who had already alienated Bute (see Strange). The negotiations for the King's outstanding acquisition, consul Joseph Smith's collection, were handled for Bute by his brother James Stuart Mackenzie, but Dalton was sent to Venice to superintend the packing and dispatch. He had arrived by 4 December 176214 and on 28 January 1763 two printed catalogues of Smith's library were endorsed as a receipt (both BL). While he was in Venice, Dalton met Benjamin West. By 4 December Dalton was known to be going to Rome, where he was 'expected every day' on 6 February 1763.15 John Murray in Venice, writing in a letter of 30 April to Horace Mann, said that a letter had 'just' been brought from Dalton in Florence.16 Once again, Dalton made a productive visit to Bologna. It seems likely that he secured additional drawings from the Casa Gennari: in connection with the purchase, Francesco Bartolozzi, who Dalton evidently met at this time, executed a number of prints for him after drawings by Guercino. The Royal Collection had been enriched, as a result of James Adam's purchase of the Albani collection, with a major series of drawings by Poussin; perhaps in emulation, Dalton unsuccessfully offered 20 sequins each for a group of over thirty landscapes attributed to Poussin owned by the Aldovrandi family.17 Oretti, who states that Dalton was at Bologna in 1764, records that he commissioned copies of altarpieces from Gaetano Gandolfi.18 While in Italy Dalton possibly acquired a number of Italian pictures for the King and also ordered two landscapes from Robert Crone for him.19 Bute's resignation as Prime Minister in 1763 and subsequent withdrawal from political life did not at first weaken the King's interest in collecting, but the heroic days of acquisition were over. Dalton's own collection was enriched with a number of works from the Smith purchase. With his wife and her niece Mary de Heulle, Dalton was painted by Zoffany c.1765-8 (Tate Gallery). In 1766 he exhibited An Aegyptian dancing girl; a drawing at the Society of Arts, and in view of his position in the household it was inevitable that Dalton was concerned with the Royal Academy, of which he became Antiquary in 1770. Dalton and his wife travelled in Italy in 1768-9 with a Miss Robinson. They were in Venice in December 176820 and later visited Rome. They left in June 1769, travelling with James Forrester, George Robertson and others, to Caprarola before following the Via Flaminia from Narni to Foligno and then crossing the Appenines for Loreto and Ancona, where they left Forrester's party. The Daltons went on to Florence, where Richard was recorded on 8 July21 and where Dalton was caricatured by Patch. The party then returned to Rome. Father Thorpe reported in October that with the 'Kings purse [Dalton] buys up all over Italy,'22 and specific evidence of the way he maintained his connections is suggested by the despatch of 82 engravings after Guercino drawings to the Instituto delle Scienze at Bologna in the same month.18 Dalton's later years are less well documented. He apparently returned to Italy in 1774-5, and is known to have remained on terms with Lord Bute. The death of Knapton in 1778 and Dalton's appointment as Surveyor of the King's Pictures only regularised what had long been a de facto position. The King's decreasing interest in pictures meant that opportunities for acquisition were missed, for example two Poussins in 1771.22 Moreover Dalton's judgement was questioned, Father Thorpe reporting that he was 'said to be rather a capricious than a judicious connoisseur of paintings'.23 Lord Nuneham in 1772 went so far as to state that Dalton retained 'for his own collection or his own profit the drawings and proof-plates' intended for the King,24 but this seems unlikely. Horace Walpole, apparently writing in 1787-8, makes the more serious charge that Dalton 'pursuaded' the King to extract the heads from a Leonardo Manuscript and paste these into two volumes.25 As late as 1790 it was thought that Dalton would 'never advise' the King to purchase the Orléans collection, the sale of which was then being considered.26 Dalton, in addition to acting for the King, for Grosvenor and for Bute, is known to have advised Thomas Hollis and Sir James Lowther (later 1st Earl of Lonsdale) about pictures. He also owned antiquities, which may have been acquired from Piranesi, as their inclusion in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778] suggests. His collection, including works weeded out of the Smith collection, was sold at Christie's in 1791 (11 Apr.).
Dalton embarked on a course of antiquities in Rome, led by Palazzi, on 19 April 1725, with Sir Edward Gascoigne, Sir Francis Head and Thomas Mostyn (Gascoigne jnl.MSS).
Dalton was with O'Donnel in March 1791 in Paestum, where Brian Hill met them.1 He was possibly the George Foster Dalton at Dublin who subscribed to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave in 1790.
Little is known of Anne Damer's first visit to Italy in 1778-9, two years after her husband's suicide. On 13 September 1779 Horace Walpole told Henry Seymour Conway 'You may imagine how happy I am at Mrs D.'s return, and at her not being at Naples, as she was likely to have been, at the dreadful explosion of Vesuvius'.1 She presented a self-portrait bust in marble of 1778 to the Uffizi which may have been executed in Florence.2  Her second visit in 1781-2 was grandly anticipated by Walpole to Horace Mann: 'In Italy she will be a prodigy; she models like Bernini'; she was going to travel 'to confirm a very delicate constitution' accompanied by Lady William Campbell, Lord William Campbell's widow, and intended to go to Naples.3 They arrived in Florence early in November 1781 and Mann noticed that she was frequenting the Gallery 'very assiduously'.4 On 21 November she left for Rome, Mann telling Walpole that he 'totally [gave] up the hopes of ever seeing her equal';5 he presented her with an antique foot, 'the perfection of sculpture'.6 In Rome by March 1782 Lady William was 'much out of order'and Mann immediately invited them both back to Florence.7 Lady Knight had seen them both in Rome in April and wrote that Lady William's 'great affliction and distresses have made her melancholy mad. She has passed some sad months here, but as she has now got pretty well she anxiously wished to get back'.8 On 30 April Lady William passed through Florence without stopping.9 Mrs Damer had meanwhile visited Naples, Sir William Hamilton telling Walpole of the sculptures she had done there, which included a bust of Ceres from a Sicilian medal which evinced 'true simplicity and dignity'.10 On 5 May 1782 Mrs Damer alone arrived in Venice.11 She was back in England on 13 June looking, thought Walpole, 'in better health than when she went, but I cannot say at all plumper'.12 Walpole remained concerned for her health and in May 1785 wrote Mann that he wished Mrs Damer 'would make you another visit. She is very delicate, and often out of order, and certainly was better for her Italian journey'.13 On 30 October 1785 Mrs Damer duly set out again for Italy, this time accompanied by her cousin Caroline Campbell, 'a very amiable sensible young woman', daughter of Lady William (who had died the previous year). Mrs Damer was in Florence early in 1786, when Mann had less than a year to live; his two nephews acted as her cavalieri serventi.14 She was in Rome on 24 January;15 she hurt her leg and 'was detained at Rome longer than she had proposed'.16 From Naples Hamilton wrote on 7 March 1786 that 'Mrs Damer will probably be here tomorrow or the next day, and is to lodge with me, her stay will not be more than ten days or a fortnight'.17 Sir William rather fell for her, and wrote that if Mrs Damer had agreed to stay in Naples he might have married her; as it was, Emma Hart arrived late in April, a few days before Mrs Damer's departure.18  In May she left Rome with Lady Elizabeth Foster, apparently intending for Venice,19 but Mrs Damer was in Florence for two days at the end of May, leaving on 1 June. She 'seemed to compassionate my coughing and extreme weakness; I never was so sensibly affected by any mark of tenderness!' wrote Mann, who gave her a cameo from the Stosch colection to give Walpole.20 Mrs Damer returned to England in July, a fact listed by Walpole within a list of her works, which included a 'profile wax of Lady Elizabeth Foster' made in Italy, and a 'Bust of Miss Campbell in terra-cotta. Large as life'.21
George Damer sat to Batoni in Rome, the portrait (priv. coll.) being dated 1750.1 He was probably the 'Mr Demer' with whom Edward Thomas dined 'almost everyday' in Florence in August2 (although this may also have been John or Joseph Damer, see below).

The brothers John and George Damer travelled in Italy without a tutor in 1764-5. They are said to have travelled with Thomas Lyttelton,1 but his name is not otherwise mentioned with theirs in Italy. The Damers were in Lucca in September 17642 and later in the year one of the brothers and a Captain Howe 'two trueborn Englishmen, were in the great gallery at Florence. They submitted quietly to be shewn a few of the pictures. But seeing the gallery so immensely long, their impatience burst forth, and they tried for a bett who should hop first to the end of it'.3 The brothers were in Naples by 22 January 1765,4 and were in Rome by March when George and Sir Thomas Gascoigne were involved in a drunken brawl in which George was said to have wounded a coachman who died (see Gascoigne); aided by Piccolomini, the Governor of Rome, the brothers absconded, first to Siena, then back to Ronciglione and finally 'towards Venice'.5 George also found time to sit to Batoni (priv. coll.).6 By mid-May they were in England.7 Both joined Gibbon's Roman Club.8
Joseph Damer took his wife and at least one of his sons to Italy in 1750. After spending time in Viterbo and Rome, the family went to Florence, arriving on 29 August. Horace Mann described how the Damers had resolved never to go into Italian company, but sought the English 'in hopes of getting whisk'; he added that 'Mr Diemer raises my compassion to the greatest degree, to see a man who in every respect might be happy, resolve to be miserable, by fancying himself ill'.1 The family were back in London by 31 December.2  Mr and Mrs Damer and their son were all painted by Batoni; according to family tradition, the father and son (said to be John) at Viterbo, the mother at Rome (Drayton; Clark/Bowron 134-6).
A portrait of Damer, 'strikingly like', was seen in Batoni's studio in Rome on 30 April 1772 by Patrick Home.1 Batoni's Lionel Damer, now in a private English collection (Clark/Bowron 344A), is presumed to be this picture, and the following three references are doubtless to the same person: the Damer in Capua on 29 April 1772 with Knightly;2 the 'Mr Damer' noticed by John Cotes in Naples in May or June 1772;3 the 'Dimer' who arrived in Venice on 30 May 1772;4 and the 'Damer' who arrived in Rome between August 1772 and July 1773 mentioned by Thomas Banks.5
Dampier went to Italy as tutor to Benjamin Tate. In Rome they met William Windham of Felbrigg and his tutor, Benjamin Stillingfleet. In 1740, together with Richard Aldworth, Robert Price, and the Earl of Haddington and his brother George Baillie, they were in Geneva to study at the Academy, calling themselves 'The Common Room Set' or 'The Bloods'.1 After he had left them, Dampier wrote to them from Strasbourg on 11 March 1741 and to Windham from Mitcham in October, his letter describing how he had been obliged to hire a garret 'in which to put my Treasures & foreign curiosities. Tis very unfortunate for me, who de[cides] to take orders next Christmas to be looked upon by some as a rank Presbyterian; by others, as a strict Roman-Catholick. The former imputation was brought upon me by our long Residence at Geneva: The latter by ye people's seeing my Italian Busts carried thro ye street to my Garret'.2
Danby went abroad with his first wife in 1786. His travel diary (Danby jnl.MSS) furnishes their itinerary, while Venetian archives record the arrival of 'Mons. Damoy con moglie' in that city on 7 May 1789.1 Danby's diary is careful and factual, to the extent of occasional meteorological observations. A separate account book reveals that he spent £450 in Italy on books, cameos, pictures and sculpture; these expenses are not itemised, but Danby and his wife sat to Jacques Sablet in Rome in 1789 (British Embassy, Rome), and at Swinton Castle in 18632 there were six pictures painted in Rome in 1789, three by the Flemish artist Denis, and three by 'Pietro', together with eight copies of old masters from the Royal Collection at Naples signed by S. Clarke [doubtless James Clark] and dated 1790. Among the family portraits was Zoffany's George Nassau, Earl of Cowper. Between 1788 and 1791 Danby purchased (possibly after his return) a number of Greek vases from James Clark in Naples.3
Perhaps because of his youth (Dance was just 17 at the time of his departure for Italy) or more likely as a consequence of the Seven Years War, Dance sailed directly from England (thus avoiding travel through France), a voyage he later described as 'tedious' to Joseph Farington.1 Dance's brother, the painter Nathaniel Dance, had been at Rome since May 1754, but in January 1759 he was working at Leghorn, where George presumably arrived.2 The brothers either met there or at Florence, where they passed the spring. In May 1759 they travelled to Rome, where they probably resided at 77 Strada Felice.3 George was soon successful in gaining a commission for two chimney-piece designs from Sir Henry Mainwaring, which his patron later had carved in marble.  By the end of 1760 George was well established, studying geometry and practising drawing with an Italian architect, Niccolo Giansimoni, and carrying out a programme of measuring such structures as the Arch of Constantine and the cupola of St Peter's. In autumn 1760 Dance took advantage of the emergency scaffold erected by the three columns of the Temple of Castor and Pollux in the Forum Romanun and obtained a licence through the agency of Giansimoni to measure and to take casts of the order; a drawing in the Soane Museum may be a record of the cornice of the Temple. In a letter dated 11 November 1760 to Robert Mylne, Piranesi described how Dance (whom he described as 'well known' to Mylne) was at work on the scaffolding making these casts.4 This activity led to some celebrity in Rome for Dance, whose circle of acquaintance began to expand to include Daniel Crespin, Lord Grey (George Harry) who was travelling with Sir Henry Mainwaring, Thomas Robinson and the antiquary James Russel. He also met the supercilious James Adam, recently arrived from England, Gavin Hamilton and Robert Strange at a dinner party early in 1761.5 The year 1761 saw the nadir of Dance's fortunes. A breakdown of communication with his family, partly caused by a servant who failed to take Dance's letters to the post, left him reduced to 'utmost necessity for want of money' by the late summer. In the first week of October, however, he received a letter from his father together with a draft for £30. Dance was introduced by Russel to three new acquaintances at this time: the Duchess of Bridgewater, Sir Richard Lyttelton, and Thomas Pitt (later Lord Camelford). Pitt commissioned a drawing of the gallery at the Colonna Palace, for which purpose Dance obtained a licence to measure it. His fortunes continued to improve. He earned some money by teaching the orders of architecture to John Hinchliffe. Encouraged by Hinchliffe, Dance began to plan a publication on the so-called Temple of Vesta at Tivoli. He had first made measured drawings of the temple in October 1761 (Soane Museum), and in the summer of 1762 he joined forces with an unnamed Italian architect to make further measurements on the basis of which he determined Palladio's record to be 'very inaccurate' (Quattro Libri, III, pls. 65-8). Perhaps because of Dance's immediate success on returning to England, nothing came of the intended publication, although a set of five finished drawings of the temple prepared in Rome during 1763 survives in the Soane Museum. In the spring of 1763 Dance was sharing his lodgings with the amateur artist Peter Stephens and the Irish painter James Forrester. In April 1763 Dance fell ill at Rome and decided to recuperate for a month in the sea air at Anzio. Whilst there, he was overheard playing the flute by the Prince Corsini, nephew of Cardinal Corsini. Charmed by Dance's musical abilities, the Prince introduced the young architect to the Cardinal himself at his nearby villa, and the Cardinal promised to assist Dance in his Roman studies, first by obtaining permission for him to draw at the nearby Villa Albani. This patronage was sustained once the party returned to Rome in June, and Dance found himself being shown around Fuga's Palazzo Corsini in the Via della Lungara personally by the Cardinal and Prince. Thereafter his visits to the palace became weekly occurrences.  It seems strange to find him writing on 7 June 1763 that he would not enter for the Concorso Clementino of the Accademia di S.Luca because 'the judgment is so partial and protections of Cardinals, Princes etc. are of such consequence that in reality little honour is to be gained by it'.6 Dance chose instead to send drawings to the Accademia di Belle Arti, where the competition was anonymous and truly international since entrants did not have to present themselves for a prova examination. Letters of January 1761 and December 1762 in the archive of the academy show that Dance intended to enter in 1762 but failed to prepare the drawings in time.7 Instead he competed in the 1763 concorso, when the architecture subject was for a 'magnificent gallery', giving Batoni and Pêcheux as his referees. Dance's design was sent to Parma on 6 April 1763 and was declared the winner on 23 May.8 Only the plan is at the academy, but English legend copies of all the drawings are in the Soane Museum. Dance's activities during the following two years are less well documented, but it is known that in December 1763 he met David Garrick at Rome.9 In June 1764 Andrew Lumisden wrote to James Bruce confirming that Bruce would not be able to have Dance's services as draughtsman for the expedition to Africa; it appears from the same source that George and Nathaniel were then studying at Naples. At some stage during that year Dance was elected to the Accademia degli Arcadi in Rome, and by 20 November he was at Paris, and almost at the end of his homeward journey.10 He cannot have been present, therefore, at his election (with Nathaniel) to the Accademia di S.Luca on 21 December 1764. It would seem from the minutes of the academy that George Dance's absentia election was sponsored by Piranesi, who attended the relevant meetings and who in January 1765 was given the responsibility of securing the papal permission necessary for both brothers because of their Protestantism.11
Nathaniel Dance's successful career was much assisted by his ambition and his appearance, nature having 'gifted him with a handsome person, and a fine leg'.1 His arrival in Rome was recorded by Hayward in May 1754,2 but there is a curious lack of information concerning his first four years in Italy. By July 1758 he had begun to establish himself in English society in Rome, being 'acquainted with my Lord Brudenell and all the English Cavaliers in Rome'.3 He attended the Accademia del nudo from September 1758, winning a prize in January 1759.4 In December 1758 and January 1759 he was painting in Leghorn with Solomon Delane,5 and it was either there or in Florence that he met his younger brother George on his arrival from England. They were together in Rome in May, probably lodging together on the Strada Felice, where George was listed in 1763 and Nathaniel in 1765.6 Dance, with Gavin Hamilton, then began to paint large classical history pieces, displaying a knowledge of antiquity and classical literature, but where Hamilton turned for his subjects primarily to Homer, Dance turned to Livy and Virgil. In 1759 he began his Death of Virginia, in which he was encouraged by Gavin Hamilton;7 it was exhibited in London at the SA in 1761. In 1760 he began Nisus and Euryalus for Sir James Grant and an Aeneas and Venus for Sir Henry Mainwaring (Christie's, 23 May 1994), whose travelling companion Lord Grey was to commission the Dido and Aeneas (see below). The Nisus was not complete when Dance left Rome-the Abbé Grant frequently described the lack of progress,8 and was probably never finished. The Aeneas and Venus caused him some anguish; 'he has endeavoured to please everybody', wrote his brother George on 7 October 1761: 'having alter'd over & over again in order to make it as perfect as possible. He has had regard to the criticisms of all the best Painters in Rome'.9 On 10 July and 2 November 1764 James Martin saw in his studio Lord Grey's Dido and Aeneas nearing completion10 and it was shown in London at the SA in 1766 (now Tate Gallery).  Dance also painted portraits and conversation groups of British travellers, many of whom were introduced by James Russel and Daniel Crespin,11 but on 21 August 1761 his brother wrote he had not been paid half of what he expected for these portraits.9 His fortunes revived, however, when in October Batoni approved the design of Dance's Aeneas and Venus, the start of an association which led to the printing of a travel card in 1762: 'Rome, Sigr. Pompeo Batoni & Mr Dance, for Portrait and History Painting'.11 On 3 February 1762 Dance told his father 'I am now in such a situation in Rome that I cannot fail of making acquaintance with some of the greatest people of England'.9 In July 1762 he painted Mrs George Craster as a pendant to Batoni's portrait of her husband ('when it was proposed to me', he wrote on 7 July, 'I was not very desirous of undertaking a thing in competition with a Man of his Merit'),12 and a series of grand whole-length portraits of British travellers ensued, somewhat in the Batoni manner, his sitters including the brothers Lord Hope and Captain James Hope (both 1763), Lord and Lady Spencer (1764) and David Garrick (1763/4)-who thought him 'a great genius, & will do wt he pleases when he goes to London'.13 On 6 February 1763 Dance had told his father that 'Mr [Richard] Dalton is expected here every day', and he had been told that 'he talked of getting me a commission to do a picture for His Majesty. If this is true, it will crown my wishes and I may then come home in triumph'.9 The commission was for the full-length portrait of the Duke of York (Royal Collection) painted in 1764. It is also possible that Dance began in Rome the Timon of Athens now in the Royal collection (exhibited at the SA in 1767).  In 1763 he met and, according to Farington,14 fell in love with Angelica Kauffman who was in Rome from January to July 1763 and from April 1764; Dance then painted her portrait (Burghley House). In September Dance went to Frascati with Angelica and her father, James Martin and Colin Morison.15 In the summer of 1764 Dance and his brother were apparently in Naples, and on 21 December 1764 they were elected to the Accademia di S.Luca, see George Dance. The large group portrait of William Weddell and the Rev. William Palgrave (Upton House) appears to be Nathaniel's only dated work from 1765, his final year in Rome, when he was living alone in the Strada Felice.16 He left Rome in June 176517 and on 13 January 1766 he had been elected to the Accademia del disegno in Florence, probably in absentia.18 He was back in London by June 1766 when Angelica arrived.
In June 1749 Andrew Lumisden in Rouen learned that Mr Daniel, whom he described as holding a captain's commission in the Young Pretender's army, was planning to go to Rome at the end of August, on business of his own and for some friends in France; he offered to take Lumisden with him and defray his costs, and they arrived in Rome before the end of 1749.1 Daniel's brother Edward, also a Jacobite, then a Catholic priest in France, has been confused with his brother.2




John Darby was a merchant and banker at Leghorn during the 1780s and '90s (and possibly earlier), whose entertainments were described as 'most splendid'.1 With his brother George he patronised Michael Kelly, the Irish singer, in 1780.2 In 1790 Mr and Mrs John Darby of Leghorn subscribed to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave. He died on 7 December 1790, leaving 'a widow with an infant family, [and] a brother in Italy',3 and was buried in Leghorn, as subsequently were his brother George and his wife Eliza.4
He was in Rome by 5 April 1727.1 'Mons. Duriscie' and James Calthorpe were in neighbouring lodgings on the Piazza di Spagna in 1727,2 and the three were mentioned by Stosch in Rome on 9 August 1727.3 Darcy was in Padua in September.4
Stosch twice included 'd'Arcy' on a list of Jacobites in Rome, on 3 January and 4 August 1729.1 Patrick Darcy and his wife Anne were lodging in the Casa dei Gesuiti from 1729 to 1731.2 On 13 March 1733 the British resident Elizeus Burges reported Darcy had been in Venice, describing him as an 'Irish Gentleman and a Roman Catholic, who was here all ye Carnaval, and went hence ye next day but one after Lord Marshall [the Earl Marischal] arriv'd. I believe he's gone to Rome. He is married and pretends to be in Italy for his health. He has been several years abroad and, I believe, most of ye time at Rome.'3  In October 1740 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu had taken lodgings in Rome recommended to her by Francis Dashwood; on 11 November she wrote that 'an English lady called Mrs D'Arcie (what D'Arcie I can't imagine) lodged in the house where I now am, and Sir Francis Dashwood was every day with her; she went from hence, by the way of Florence, to England'.4.

Lord Darnley had been in The Hague in March 1787, and St Petersburg, Warsaw and Berlin in 1788.1 He came of age in 1788 and took his seat in the Irish House of Lords in March 1789, before resuming his grand tour. In Rome he took leave of the Gibbes family on 6 April 1790,2 and he was in Venice from 17-24 April.3 Darnley collected extensively on this tour: Elizabeth Gibbes saw a chimney piece which had been made for him by an un-named sculptor/restorer (probably Carlo Albacini), and he bought Salvator Rosa's Death of Regulus from the Palazzo Colonna in Rome.4
The young Lord Dartmouth showed himself to be a discerning patron of the fine arts in the course of the year he spent in Italy. He made the grand tour with his step-brother Frederick, Lord North (Dartmouth's widowed mother having remarried North's widowed father), and they shared Christopher Golding as their tutor. In Rome, where they had arrived by January 1753,1 they stayed in the Casa Guarnieri.2 Both sat to Batoni for portraits only completed in 1756 (Clark/Bowron 192, 195; NG London [North] and priv. coll.) and Batoni also made miniature portraits of them both in watercolour (Clark/Bowron 193, 194; Sotheby 27 Jul. 1923 [North] and priv. coll., Rome). Both young men also sat to Thomas Jenkins3 who painted a Nymph for Dartmouth and made him drawings from famous statues. Jenkins soon became his agent, his subsequent letters from Rome describing his acquisitions made with 'money paid for the use of Lord Dartmouth in Rome in 1753 and 1754'.4  It was doubtless Jenkins who persuaded Dartmouth to become a substantial patron of his friend Richard Wilson; he apparently commissioned two views of Rome in oil, completed in 1753,5 and, according to Farington,6 acquired sixty-eight of his drawings. Jenkins's first account from Rome (25 June 1754) included twelve finished Wilson drawings of Rome,7 as well as paintings by G.B. Busiri (eight views of Rome; sold Sotheby's, 8 Jul. 1964), Salvator Rosa, Dughet and Benefial, and still-lifes by van der Meulen and Stern, companion pieces 'to the pictures they before had the honour to do for your Lordship'.4 On 14 December 1754 Jenkins dispatched a case with drawings by Batoni, Wilson and Jenkins himself, and on 28 February 1755 more pictures, including two landscapes by Momper and 'a portfolio with 30 of Mr Wilson's drawings'. Although their tour was not protracted it was one of particular interest. On 20 April they were in Capua on their way to Naples, where they were apparently with Richard Wilson;8 in May 1753 they set out for Paestum, an unusual excursion at this time. A letter from North to his former tutor at Eton, Charles Dampier, described their journey in detail.9 'Ye road from Rome to Naples abounds with Classical amusement: ... ye Road from Naples to Paestum is no less amusing', he begins, and the greater part of his letter provides one of the earliest accounts by an English traveller of the Greek Doric temples at Paestum.10 On their return journey, Dartmouth and North were in Pisa on 18 June11 and had passed through Turin by 15 August.12 By the end of May 1754 Dartmouth had taken his seat in the House of Lords. Amongst the Dartmouth papers there is a six-page manuscript giving advice to a traveller in Italy,13 presumably prepared for Dartmouth's visit: in Rome Jenkins and Wilson alone are listed as English students of painting, while James Russel and [John?] Parker appear as antiquarians.
Sir Francis, a high-spirited Baronet remembered for the excesses of his Hell Fire Club at West Wycombe, was twice in Italy. Little is known of his first visit; he was in Venice in December 1730 with Lord Boyne and Edward Walpole (amongst others),1 and then in Padua on 4 March 1731.2  On his second visit he clearly enjoyed himself. He arrived in Florence on 6 December 1739.3 He was in Siena with James Stuart Mackenzie on 16 December4 and in Rome by the end of January, when he addressed a letter 'about wine. general debauchery and mayhem' to Lord Boyne.5 De Brosse described how, on the death of Pope Clement XII [6 Feb.], le chevalier Ashewd (undoubtedly Dashwood), 'Un des plus comiques hommes du monde', and [the 3rd Earl of] Stafford ('un des mauvais catholiques') took part in a mock English conclave (the real one sat between February and May 1740), impersonating the Cardinal Ottoboni; 'c'était un vrai scandalum magnatum',6 and on Good Friday in the darkened Sistine Chapel he took a horsewhip to the devout flagellants.7 Dashwood shared one of Mark Parker's guided tours of Rome with Sir Roger Newdigate and Sir John Rawdon; the three noticed a granite column on the Palatine Hill which they purchased jointly through Parker, for subsequent use as granite tables.8 He recommended lodgings in Rome to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu who said that one Mrs d'Arcie [Darcy] 'lodged in the house where I now am, and Sir Francis Dashwood was every day with her'.9 He was again in Florence on 6 September 1740, when Lady Pomfret visited his 'Academy'; she saw him on 1 October,10 but wrote that he had left on the 2nd.11 On 7 October Spence saw him in Modena.12 Horace Walpole later remarked that Dashwood was one who was 'seldom sober' the whole time he was in Italy.13 In 1742 Horace Mann noticed that Dashwood, then in England, was writing to the Abbé Godard, a Jacobite agent in Rome, but, he wrote, 'I cannot believe that he knows the use the Abbé makes of his letters'.14


Henry Watkin Dashwood with his tutor Mr Delon, described as a Dutchman, were in Vienna in January 1768.1 On 9 May they were listed in Naples,2 and on 24 June Dashwood wrote to William Hamilton from Rome thanking him for his kindness to himself and Delon during their stay in Naples.3 They were about to leave Rome on 19 August.4 Dashwood had sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 318; priv. coll. USA), and they were in Florence for the celebrations in honour of Horace Mann's investiture as Knight of the Bath and of the visit of the Queen of Naples, in October 1768.5  Little is known of his second visit, made at a time when he was in financial difficulties at home.6 He dined with Henry Bankes and the British resident John Strange in Venice on 8 January 1779.7 On 28 March 1780 Bankes told Strange that Dashwood was proposing to return home in the autumn and was meanwhile in Naples; 'I hope', he added, 'the fortune his father has left him will make him to settle his affairs in some tolerable manner'.
His arrival at Leghorn from Genoa with George Wood [Capt. Wood?] was reported on 1 November 1734.1 He was in Padua on 27 May 1735 with Wood and Thomas Lisle.2
Samuel Dashwood had been in Turin1 and Milan before he arrived in Florence by 2 October 1740.2 On 5 November he wrote from Florence to Sir Roger Newdigate saying he had spent two months in Milan ('I never was so tired of a Place in my life'), and had come to Florence and 'launch'd out at once into high life'; he had met Sir Francis Dashwood (who, however, had left Florence on 3 October), Lord Lincoln and Lady Walpole (later Countess of Orford), Lady Pomfret and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu ('who says I'm so Odd a fellow she does not know what to make of me'); he was shortly going with George Pitt, Nathaniel Castleton and Edward Holdsworth to Pisa, Leghorn and Siena ('where I should lik'd to have been a great while ago'), but would return to Florence while the others went on to Rome.3 Lady Pomfret (who refers in her diary and letters distinctly to both 'Sir Francis' and 'Mr Dashwood') saw a great deal of 'Mr Dashwood' in Florence between 10 October and 30 December and recorded Dashwood's departure for Rome soon after 15 January 1741.4 He gave regular concerts each Wednesday which she attended, and he continued to enjoy the company of Pitt and Castleton, together with Richard Boughton, Samuel Sturgis and G.B. Maria Uguccioni (from the office of records in Florence, a suitor of Lady Pomfret's daughter Sophia); he also met Mann and Horace Walpole. He left for Rome in January 1741.  In Rome he was still with Pitt and Castleton, and sometimes with Francis Naylor; he also frequently saw Lord Lincoln and the Pomfrets, who arrived on 17 March.5 He was in Padua on 4 June 1741 with Lord Lincoln and Lord Elcho,6 and two days later he was in Venice with Lord Elcho, Naylor and the Pomfrets; on 8 June they all visited the arsenal.7 He left Venice for Paris on 12 June with Lord Elcho,8 and was back in London by October.9
In 1772 Thomas Dashwood was in Florence, where Zoffany included him in his painting of the Tribuna (Windsor).1 On 1 June 1773, with Lord Winchilsea, James Smith Barry and Dr Alexander Drummond, he 'sail'd from [Naples] for the Archipelago and Constantinople in a British Merchant Vessel'.2 The Abbé Grant, describing this expedition identified Dashwood as 'Mr Dashwood, son to Sir James of that name'; he added that James Clark was also in the party.3 Both Patrick Home and John Cotes met him in Italy.4 He was probably the Dashwood who told Timothy Collopy in Naples in 1773 that James Forrester had been set up as a dealer in Rome by Thomas Jenkins.5
Young Dashwood, Sir James's brother' was lodging in the same house as Samuel Crisp in Rome in January 1739; Crisp described him as 'a good natured pretty fellow'.1 He was possibly the subject of a pastel by Rosalba Carriera (inscribed Phillips Dashwood on the verso; priv. coll.).2
Mrs Dashwood gave a ball in Rome on 18 January 1790, and a masquerade on 10 February; Elizabeth Gibbes attended both and joined the Dashwoods in 'a frisky party' to the Vatican on 5 April.1 In April Jacob More wrote to Thomas Harvey of Catton saying that 'your friend' Mr Dashwood was charmed with Rome.2 On 28 May the family arrived in Venice, Mr and Mrs Dashwood 'con 4 figli'.3
Davel, a merchant at Ancona, was visited by Lord and Lady Pomfret on 23 May 1741: 'His home is a very large palace, which he hires at a small rent. It looks on the sea; and once lodged Christina Queen of Sweden.'1 Possibly the Theodore Davel who signed a merchants' petition in Naples on 27 July 1757.2
In October 1714 Davenant received his credentials as envoy extraordinary to the courts at Modena, Genoa, Parma and Florence, and he was in Florence by May 1715. He visited each court in turn to present his credentials, but resided chiefly at Genoa,1 where his wife joined him on 27 December 1716 (arriving on an English warship from Leghorn).2 In 1716, soon after he settled in Genoa, he was called upon to restore 'the nation's honour' after a Richard Cresswell had been imprisoned for flagrant and frequent acts of sexual deviancy.3 Davenant was a cultured diplomat. He studied Italian and was a friend of the poet Anton Maria Salvini who translated Addison's Cato at his instigation,4 and he helped James Brydges (later Duke of Chandos) to form his celebrated collection of works of art.5 He had sought paintings for Brydges from 1705 when he was at Frankfurt, and in Italy between 1715 and 1717 he bought several pictures from the Livio Odescalchi and Bardi collections, cartoons by Raphael and drawings by Michelangelo, as well as statuary, chimneypieces, doorways and tables. He recommended mural painters for the Duke's new house, Canons. Chandos paid for the education of Davenant's younger brother Charles, but relations between patron and agent were not always easy. In 1722 Davenant and his secretary, Abraham Castres, were in Rome.6 Stosch, whom he consulted on antique gems, said he talked too much when in drink and had commented that the Pretender was a martyr to his faith, but Davenant's principal concern in Rome was to see the antiquities.7 He was in Florence on 5 September that year, when Rawlinson dined with him; he was going soon after to Leghorn with Castres, Benjamin Crowe and an officer from Port Mahon.8 On 12 January 1723 he was in Padua with Castres on his way back to England.9
At his death in 1798 Davenport had been forty years British consul at Naples.1 On 27 January 1773 Charles Townley paid 'Mr Davenport vice Consul' for letters.2 Thomas Jones saw 'Mr Davenport the Vice consul' frequently in Naples between 1778 and 1783: in September 1782 Davenport introduced Jones to Angelica Kauffman and helped him with arrangements for his departure in 1783.3 In 1790 Davenport subscribed to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave. In the spring of 1794 he met in Naples the Leghorn merchant N. Brooke.4

Davenport was in debt in Rome in 1704. According to the Duke of Shrewsbury he had then been in Rome 'above a year' and was a 'little distracted', claiming his real name was Williamson and that [John?] Fuller, a merchant, had money for him at Leghorn; others said he was a merchant from Constantinople whose real name was Latwood (Shrewsbury Jnl., 11 May 1704).After a long residence in France Davenport arrived in Rome on 4 December 1797, saying he was going straight on to Naples.1 In September 1798, when he was staying in a village some forty miles from Naples, he learned of Nelson's victory at the Nile and his carriage was surrounded by women and children 'calling the English Saviours, kissing His Cloaths &c.'.2 In December 1798 he left Naples with the approach of the French armies.
Davers was soon to be in Florence on 18 April 1756, when Horace Walpole wrote of him to Horace Mann;1 Mann, in turn, introduced him to Cardinal Albani in the autumn.2 While he was in Rome he sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 197; Ickworth).
Charles Burney characterized Cecilia Davies's voice as clear, steady and perfectly in tune, wanting colour and passion, but with an excellent bravura.1 On her first tour of Europe, which lasted six years, she travelled with her parents and her sister, Marianne, who frequently accompanied her on the 'armonica', a peculiarly demanding instrument invented by Benjamin Franklin, consisting of a series of glasses fixed on an axle, moved by a treadle. In Italy Cecilia had great success in Hasse's Ruggiero at Naples in 1772, and at Florence with Sacchini's Armida on 19 September 1772 and Gluck's Aristeo on 20 March 1773.2 She was, wrote Mount Edgcumbe, 'the first Englishwoman who had yet sustained the part of prima donna, and in that situation was second only to Gabrielli, whom she even rivalled in neatness of execution'.3 She was in London for her debut in Italian opera on 20 November 1773.  After a successful London season in 1776-7, she returned to Italy in 1779. She was in Venice on 19 May: 'Miss Davies sounds very ill. I have not found one person that thinks her a good singer', wrote Henry Bankes,4 while Lord Herbert heard her in Florence in November, but thought she compared poorly with Marquesi, the eunuch.5 Cecilia and her sister were living in Florence in August 1782, when announcements of her performances began to appear regularly in the Gazzetta Toscana; they had a house in the Fondaccio di S.Spirito and sang frequently at Court, for the Corsini family and for Lord Tylney.6 On 24 May 1783, Marianne announced in the Gazzetta Toscana that her departure from Florence was approaching and she would perform privately at a day's notice. The following year the sisters were without work; a benefit concert was held for them and they returned afterwards to England.3 Northcote later remembered visiting Cecilia in Florence with the painter Prince Hoare: 'she had then in a great measure fallen off but she was still very much admired. What a strange thing a reputation of this kind is, that the person herself survives, and sees the meteors of fashion rise and fall one after another, while she remains totally disregarded ... I have hardly heard her name mentioned in the last thirty years, though in her time she was quite as famous as any one since'.7



George Davis was a merchant in Naples where he was made British consul in 1672. In 1702 he retired to Leghorn where he died three years later and was buried in the Protestant cemetery (Pagano de Divitiis, 325, 331; Leghorn Inscr., 23).

Davis was sharing lodgings with William Blackett, 'Mr Myddleton of Chirk Castle' [Richard Myddelton] and a Mr Hesketh at Margherita's hotel at Rome in March 1785.1 Blackett's letters suggest that Davis had been with him in Florence (presumably in 1784) and Naples, before they came to Rome on 21 February. They spent most of May in Venice (see William Blackett). Davis, like Blackett, had admired the work of Jacob More in Rome. More wrote to Davis from Rome on 10 December 1785 saying he had just received back Durno's Falstaff mustering Recruits, which the artist had been copying for Lord Bristol; both this and a Storm by More himself appear to have been reserved for Davis, who paid 100 guineas for the Storm on 6 December (Jacob More addressed him as Mark Davis).2 He also acquired a carved sardonyx from Nathaniel Marchant.3 Davis was in Florence on 26 November 17854 and must have been the Mr Davis writing on 30 December 1785 to Sir Robert Keith from Rome,5 where he was much in the company of Lord Bulkeley, with whom he was subsequently in Naples in January 1786 and again in Rome in February, see Thomas, 7th Viscount Bulkeley.




According to Horace Mann, Davison had travelled with the William, 3rd Earl of March (who was in Italy from February 1746), before attending the academy in Turin. Speaking a little French and Italian, Davison appeared in Florence in June 1747 with James Mill, both wearing 'made up laced uniforms of blue and red'. Both made frequent trips to Leghorn and Pisa, Mill being part of the 'Bengal Conspiracy' (see John Acton). Davison however returned to Turin on 24 June with 'Drummond' [William Macgregor?].1 Very soon afterwards he was hired as a tutor by Thomas Duncombe (who had been in Venice in February 1747).2 Mill, 'a very jolly fellow', was still causing 'great speculation' in Florence in January 1748; Horace Mann said he had a share in the cargoes of three captured Dutch vessels.3 In November 1749, as Colonel Mill, he left Florence with Acton and Baron Toussaint, intent on establishing a company for East Indian trade.4

Mr Davey, portrait painter from Exeter' arrived in Rome in September 1755.1 Edwards stated that he returned to England in about 1760,2 and he was probably the 'Robert Devy' who exported a number of marbles from Rome in February 1759.3 In 1765 Hayward noted 'Mr Davey returns - a Cab't maker',1 possibly Robert Davy, who did not exhibit in London that year.
Davy accompanied Lord Ossulston to Italy. William Artaud saw them in Rome in December 1797, and later wrote to Davy in Naples asking him to give his compliments to Messrs Powe and Folville. They had returned briefly to Rome by 23 February when French troops were already in the city (Artaud letter bk.MSS, 15 Dec. 1797, 23 Feb. 1798).  Possibly the 'Sr Johan Dacia inglese' with 'Baron Horustein'[?], called 'Inglese dell'Imperio', in Vicenza, Udine and Venice in July 1794, en route for Germany (ASV IS 771).
Dawkins went to Italy on succeeding to his father's estates, accompanied by the Rev. Thomas Townson. They set out from England on 22 September 1742 with William Drake and Edward Holdsworth, and 'after about eight months they proceeded by way of Marseilles and Toulon to Italy'.1  Dawkins was in Florence in July 1744,2 when Townson appears to have been with Drake and Holdsworth in Rome, but Dawkins probably appears with Drake, Townson and Holdsworth in the conversation piece James Russel painted in Rome in 1744 (Shardeloes). They were certainly together in Rome early in 1745. Dawkins commissioned four pictures from Joseph Vernet in January,3 as did Drake, and in February, together with Drake and Holdsworth, he declined to attend a celebration given by Cardinal Albani in Rome for the birth of another Hapsburg Prince;4 Dawkins was only to renounce his Jacobite sympathies in 1753, after the British government had issued an order for his arrest. At Easter 1745 Dawkins was staying near the Corso in the Strada della Croce.5 On 5 May he set out from Rome with John Bouverie, Richard Phelps and James Russel, passing through Loreto and Ancona to Bologna, where they spent a week in mid-May; they then proceeded to Venice for Ascension, again meeting Drake, Townson and Holdsworth. Russel, Phelps and Bouverie left Venice on 4 June.6 Dawkins apparently returned to England through Vienna with Drake, Townson and Holdsworth, who arrived in England on 26 August 1745. Dawkins left England again on 3 September 1749,7 and was in Rome by 23 December. On 17 March 1750 he left Rome with John Bouverie to join Robert Wood in Naples, whence they embarked on their celebrated tour of the East.8 Dawkins returned to London in May 1751,9 see Robert Wood.
James Dawkins travelled with his Swiss governor Bynion. At Rome in April and Naples in May 1783 they frequently saw John and Allan Ramsay. By 11 July Dawkins was in Rome visiting S.Martino ai Monte with John Ramsay and Charles Long (whom he had met in Naples).1 He also met William Davenport Bromley (the unhappy charge of Charles Parker), who accompanied Dawkins and Bynion to Florence. They spent several months there, frequently with the Ramsays and meeting Dr Parkinson2 and Captain Robert Merry in December. Bynion and Ramsay collaborated with Merry in his publication of The Arno Miscellany, a series of odes and poems, see Merry.3 Dawkins left Florence on 19 March 1784, apparently with Mrs Hannah Long (whose husband Charles had died in Rome the previous August), and they were both with Bromley in Milan on 20 June.2 Bromley, suffering from melancholia, returned home directly from Milan,4 while Dawkins travelled more slowly through Europe. He met the Berry family in Geneva on 28 June5 and Bromley's former travelling companion, Charles Parker, in Vienna early in July.4 In 1785 he married Mrs Long. While he was in Italy Dawkins sat to H.D. Hamilton for an (undated) oval pastel portrait (Christie's, 28 Feb. 1913), drawn either in Rome or Florence.


On 2 October 1709 John Dawnay was in Padua with Lord Longueville1 who arrived in Venice on 20 December 1709.2  He was next in Rome in March 1711 with Lord Cornbury, Thomas Hobart and William Leigh. Their paths frequently coincided with those of John Bellings and the Waters jnl.MSS describes much of their itinerary. They stayed in Naples from 17 April until leaving for Rome on 11 May; they left Rome on 16 July, going 'towards Leghorn' and they left Florence on 11 September, arriving in Bologna the next day. On 14 September they reached Ferrara, where they encountered Bellings for the last time. They stayed a few days at Genoa before heading for Turin and the Alps, hoping to cross before the snow hindered their progress.3 Charles Baldwyn met them in Turin, recording that Lord Cornbury and Leigh 'went to Geneva on Monday, and Mr Dawney on Thursday.'4  In 1731 Dawnay was described as a 'Jacobite', who would 'not suffer the King to be prayed for in his family prayers.'5


On 8 June 1768 John Dawson was in Venice.1 In 1769 he sat to Batoni in Rome (priv. coll.)2 and on 18 March he applied for a licence to export seventeen paintings from Italy.3 On 9 December Thomas Jenkins wrote to Charles Townley from Rome saying that in the case he had just sent him there was a portfolio of eight drawings by Forrester 'for John Dawson Esq who lives in Merrion Street Dublin ... a cousin to Mrs Damer'.4
Thomas Dawson was one of the Irish contingent at Rome caricatured by Reynolds in his Parody of the School of Athens, painted in 1751 (NGI).1 He sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 145; priv. coll.) and commissioned paintings from Vernet in Rome in April 1751 (which were completed in September 1752).2 James Russel acted as his agent in Rome.3

Alexander Day came to Italy in January 1774. On 23 December 1773 he wrote to Humphry (in Rome) saying he was at Lyons with Mr and Mrs [James] Paine, and on 7 January he wrote from Turin accepting Humphry's offer of a room in Rome.1 When Hayward recorded Day's arrival in Rome in 1774 he described him as 'scolar to Humphrys'.2 Day was to spend most of the next forty years in Rome, practising as a miniaturist, copyist and dealer. On the occasion of his marriage in Rome in 1792 Day was described as 'della citta di Sommerset in Ighilterra, venne a Roma d'aprile 1774 da dove poi fino al presente mai e partito, abbita sotto la cura di S.Andrea delle Fratte e fa il miniatore'.3 Day shared an apartment in Rome with Nevay from 1774 to 1811, first in the Strada Gregoriana (1774) and then the Strada Felice (his age given as 30 in 1783); in 1793 Anna Maria Mattei, his wife, was said to be 24 years old and Day 42.4 Farington recounted that Ecclesiastical authority had compelled Day to marry the lady he had secreted in his apartment and by whom he had had children.5  In 1779 Northcote described him as a miniature painter and dealer in paintings; in April that year Northcote (who was sharing rooms with him in Rome in 1779) went to Naples with Day, Tresham, Maria Hadfield, Prince Hoare and Thomas and Mrs Banks.6 Day frequently encountered Thomas Jones between 1776 and 1780.7 He appeared as a miniaturist on the lists of British artists at Rome in 1790 and 1793 (at the Arco della Regina, the same address as Nevay) and he signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus in April 1794;8 Artaud recorded that Day had soldiers quartered on him in Rome in February 1798.9 Little is known of his practice as an artist. By 1786 Day appears to have been employed as a copyist by the 4th Earl of Bristol, in which role he quarrelled openly with Jacob More, Bristol's agent.10 In February 1785 Richard Worsley visited 'Carlo Bruzis [Labruzzi], Mr Mores [Jacob More] & Mr Days paintings' in Rome;11 in 1792 Philip Yorke (3rd Earl of Hardwicke) commissioned Day to make drawings from the antique,12 and Robert Parker, in 1792-3, wrote that Day was 'very good' and was 'to exec[ute] H[ea]ds. of Emp[ero]rs for Wood[?]' (Rome list 1790). In 1793 Sir William Forbes commented that Day's miniatures were 'much inferior in merit to several in London', but he noticed that Day had a copy of Titian's Danae in his collection for sale at 100 gns.13 There is a large miniature by Day of John, Lord Hervey, dated 1795 at Ickworth, and he had some success with a portrait of William Lambton in 1797.14  Dealing occupied him increasingly. In August 1787 he was trying to persuade Pacetti to sell a marble Faun to Sir Richard Worsley; by 1800 he was negotiating for Lord Bristol.15 In 1792 he wrote to William Hamilton describing the copies he had made in oil and in miniature from a portrait of Lady Hamilton, but labouring more the regrettable delay in sending 'the Colossal Head & Leg' from Monte Cavallo.16 Day was to exhibit his casts from Monte Cavallo in London in 1816. With the French invasion of Rome in 1798, spectacular opportunities arose for dealers, of whom Day was at first prominent. He bought a great part of the Aldobrandini collection that year17 and came to London in 1801 with 'one of the most important collections which was introduced into this country so recently after the French invasion of Italy had thrown open the doors of the palaces to the acquisition of those high works of art, which were previous to that time absolutely unattainable'.18 Day's pictures were exhibited in Lower Brook Street and Farington saw him in London in March and July that year.19 Day soon returned to Rome, sending pictures back to London in 1802 and 1806.20 For some time he was working with the Italian dealer and painter Vincenzo Camuccini, with whom he briefly visited England again in 1804. He finally returned to London late in 1815.21 He had sometimes been confused with Albert Dies, a German engraver in Rome at the same time, see Appendix 4.
John Day came to Rome as the pupil of Gavin Hamilton in 1756.1 'Giovanni Dei' lodged with Hamilton in the parish of S.Andrea delle Fratte between 1759 and 1765 (his age given as 26 in 1763 and 30 in 1765), Hamilton's name alone appearing in 1766.2 Day's widow said he had studied at Rome for 12 years.3
Possibly the 'Dailley' in Turin some time between October 1739 and September 1740 (Spence, Letters, 421).

"Dean, the landscape painter, was sent to Italy by Henry, 2nd Viscount Palmerston, and his arrival in Rome is recorded in 1768.1 He 'made himself so conspicuous in Italy', said Thomas Jones, 'where no person as I was told that ever went from this country to that, had had the address to excite so much curiosity and attention - his fame flew him where ever he went - From Florence to Rome - From Rome to Naples and so back again - ""Ecco viene il grand pittore inglese"" was the cry'.2 Father Thorpe described another aspect of Dean's reputation in Italy: 'the fellow is mad in his prices; if not less so in his conduct; knocks off pictures as fast almost as a carpenter does a joint stool; contrives to get his own prices for them, and yet cannot live ... His pictures are rather pleasing than fine, they always present fair weather ... He cannot paint figures; they are always put into the picture by another hand'.3 During the winter of 1768-9 Dean was commissioned by Sir Watkin Williams Wynn to paint a landscape (paid for in July 1769, see Wynn). By 23 February 1771 Dean had taken rooms at Rome in the same house as Timothy Collopy on the Strada Babuino; the following year he moved to the Strada Felice and was recorded, aged 26, in lodgings with Solomon Delane and James Nevay.4 In 1771 Dean was copying one of Prince Altieri's Claudes for Walters (see Edward Walter) in England, for which he was paid 120 guineas.5 He had evidently spent a short period in Naples by 1773 as in that year, from Rome, he sent his View of Naples to the SA exhibition in London. He was again in Naples early in 1774, Father Thorpe recording on 15 January 1774 that 'last week [Dean] ran away to Naples to get away from the search of his creditors'.3 Dean then brought to Naples a large landscape which he hoped to sell to Lord Clive for 200 guineas;6 having first refused 100 guineas for it, he sold it within a year for above £200.7 Sir William Hamilton owned two of his oval landscapes, probably acquired at this time.8 Meanwhile in March 1774 Thorpe had sent to Lord Arundell of Wardour a Landscape with Nymphs dancing.9 Dean may have been the 'Heen' who passed through Capua on 28 April 1774 with Delane and William Parry, and the 'Dam' listed with Christopher Ebdon in Florence in February 1775.10 He was certainly in Florence by December 1775 when he was accompanying Maria Hadfield to the opera and was presented to the Countess of Albany. On 24 February 1776 Maria Hadfield wrote that Dean had completed a painting for Lord Cowper and was beginning another.11 In October 1776 he was copying a drawing by Salvator Rosa in the Uffizi,12 and in November, with Ebdon, he met Thomas Jones.13 By this time young William Hadfield was his pupil.14 On 12 January 1777 Dean was elected to membership of the Academy of Florence, his name in the Schedule of Members being annotated 'Claude l'Irlandais'.15 But his private fortunes continued to be erratic. Thomas Jones described him in 1776 coming to the hotel in Florence to greet the newly arrived British travellers: 'Nobody took the least notice of him, or deigned an Answer - upon which Mr D with tears in his Eyes, left the room, which affected my feelings much notwithstanding the numerous relations I had heard to his prejudice'.2 Dean had neglected to bring his wife and child to Italy with him, but in 1776 Lord Palmerston sent them out unexpectedly to join him in Florence. Edwards relates how the artist happened to be standing at the door of the locanda where he was staying and when he saw a woman approach who was in difficulties, he offered to help. When he discovered that the lady was his wife, he fled to Vallombrosa where 'he laid some days to recover his spirits'.16 It may have been then that he painted his view of Vallombrosa (later engraved by W. Thomas).17 Dean was back in Rome in 1777, when he sent a Neapolitan scene to the RA exhibition.  He returned to England in 1779 and fell out of favour with Lord Palmerston. He began to pass off works by an Italian hand as his own. In 1780 he exhibited in London an illuminated transparency of Vesuvius in eruption, of which Jones wrote: 'This, like the lambent flame of an expiring Taper, preceded the immediate extinction of his character as an Artist - After that, I heard, he commenced itinerant Preacher, And the last account ... was that he had sunk into the Oblivious, but useful Situation of a Mechanik in one of our English Dockyards'.2"
A young man of uncommon genius and taste',1 he was sent to Italy in 1785 for three years by the Royal Academy. He settled in Rome in the Corso and was quickly successful.2 Within months of his arrival he had finished a 'large work' (doubtless the large bas-relief with over thirty figures, The Judgement of Jupiter, which, according to Redgrave, he sent back to the RA in London the following year) and was making a model for Henry Blundell, who visited him in Rome in April 1786.3  In 1787 Sir Cecil Bisshopp bought his relief of a Marine Venus (Parham Park), and Sir Richard Worsley bought another of the same subject (DBS). By 18 March 1787 he had finished a marble bas-relief of Edward I and Queen Eleanor which was exhibited at the RA the following year.4 Sir Richard Worsley commissioned work from him in 1788, but his delay in payment compelled Deare momentarily to consider returning home.5 When on 24 June 1788 his statutory three-year residence in Italy had elapsed, however, he had sufficient commissions in hand to enable him to stay in Rome. He was then living near the Piazza Barberini ('going to S.Nicolò di Tolentino on the left hand'), where he was also listed in 1790 and 1793 (Rome Lists).  In 1789 Edward Poore commissioned a bas-relief copy of a Bacchus and the following year was considering some bronzes figures.6 A sketchbook (VAM) contains drawings of Rome by 'Paine' and Deare dated between 1784 and 1790. In July 1791 Deare was writing confidently to his brother 'I have been so extremely fortunate this last winter, in getting commissions to execute in marble, that I have near £1200 worth of work to do. I have received a great deal of money, with which I have purchased a great quantity of marble, which I mean to turn into gold as quickly as possible. I have several men at work for me, and a boy who acts as my servant. I have the best study in Rome, and live like a gentleman'.7 He was also in love with 'a clever little Roman girl', whom he was to marry. The 4th Earl of Bristol and John Penn were now prominent among his patrons. In January 1791 Deare was finishing a Venus and Cupid for Lord Bristol (a commission worth £270), which he cynically supposed would 'remain upon his hands', according to that patron's whimsical manner,8 and from Penn, who took him to Naples in his own carriage, he had commissions worth £470, including his marble bust (Eton Coll.), a relief of The Landing of Julius Caesar (Stoke Manor) and a chimneypiece.9  A monument for William Wilson executed in Rome in 1792 (Ganton church) was probably commissioned by Sir John Legard who was in Rome that year. In 1793 Sir William Forbes visited Deare's studio and found The Three Graces with the Thread of Life, 'a piece of Monumental Sculpture, which although the idea was rather trite, was executed with great taste', and a chimneypiece for Sir Corbet Corbet ornamented with a relief closely imitating the nine muses in the Capitoline Museum; Forbes mentioned a commission from Lord Berwick for copies of the Apollo Belvedere and the Medici Venus, the marble for which, Deare told him, would cost £200.10 This was a commission which led to faction. In March 1794 Deare wrote a tetchy letter describing Durno's jealousy of his success, his quarrel with 'these thieves the antiquarians & the monopolising artists', Hewetson and Jenkins, and calling his patron Poore 'a dirty fellow'.11 Deare's temper was 'certainly sometimes considered rather hasty',12 and this same year he was arrested in Rome 'per affari di Stato', conceivably in connection with his adherence to a religious sect who worshipped stark naked.13 Meanwhile Deare was probably the 'George Dire' who applied to export various sculptures from Rome on 9 May 1793,14 and in April 1794 he was among those English artists in Rome who signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus (Rome List 1794). Stability returned with Royal patronage in 1795. On 11 July 1795 he could write to his brother 'I have been very fortunate, having sold three rich chimney-pieces to the Prince of Wales, and one to the Earl of Bristol. I am now executing the bust of his Royal Highness Augustus Frederick ... and another of Lady Webster', and the Berwick copies were under way.15 It was Prince Augustus who had contrived the commission for the Prince of Wales, and for whom Deare executed a further elaborate mosaic chimneypiece from ornamental designs by George Hadfield.16 This was the height of Deare's achievement. In August 1797 he had been commissioned to make another chimneypiece for William Lambton (who died, however, that November),17 but the invading French armies impounded Lord Berwick's Venus de Medici and the two chimneypieces for the Prince of Wales.18 Deare's health then gave way; in January 1798 Artaud said he thought Deare 'will never recover the sight of his Eyes',19 and on 17 August, after a short illness, Deare died at the age of thirty nine in the arms of his friend Charles Grignion. He was buried in the Protestant cemetery,20 leaving 'a young widow, six months advanced in her preganancy, and a charming little daughter of about three years old'. His widow being 'very young, unexperienced and surrounded by poor relations of very little education', Deare's particular friends in Rome, Grignion, Fagan, 'Christopher, Sculptor' [Hewetson] and Edward Gordon, sought authority from Deare's father to administer his estate,21 and Vincenzo Pacetti became an executor; the estate was being discussed in his studio by Alexander Day, Leonetti and Fagan in December 1799 and the subject recurs in Pacetti's giornale until February 1801.22
Thomas de Borgh, bishop of Ossory in Ireland' was entertained in Leghorn on 13 September 1769 by Richard Cosgrave, a Catholic merchant, and left for Florence where on 31 March 1770 he christened the son of Thomas Lyttelton of Hagley (Gazz.Tosc.).
Deeker's manuscript journal (written for his father in 1770)1 describes his travels with Mr D-- and Mr F--, his 'extremely kind and indulgent master', in France and Italy over a six-month period; it is indexed by places visited and the main sites seen in each. The journal is illustrated with drawings and maps; there are details of expenses and a (later) list of Interesting remarks on such subjects as banditti, lice on Italian nobility, Limmond's indiscretion in insulting the Pope, incivility at Pain's English Hotel at Leghorn, the account of the Harlequinade at Turin, the Regatta at Venice, and 'the procedure of Italian Highwaymen compared with English'.
Degge had been in Spa with William Mytton and Thomas Anson in July 1723,1 and was in Rome on 22 May 1724 when he visited the palace of Cardinal Spada with Richard Rawlinson and Benedict Calvert. On 3 July he left Rome for Siena but had returned by 15 December,2 staying at the Monte d'Oro. On 17 February 1725 he was in Padua with Lucius Cary, the Lambert brothers (Benjamin and Francis) and several others, 'all safe and sound arrived here from the Carnaval of Venice'.3 On 4 April 1725 he set out from Rome to visit Naples with Anson and Thomas Kemp. Rawlinson recorded Anson and Degge leaving Rome for Florence on 21 May.2 Ten months later Degge was writing from Milan to the sculptor Alessandro Galilei describing Edward Gascoigne, whom he had met in Cremona (probably in December).4

De Grey was in Italy with Patrick St Clair.1 The Duke of Shrewsbury saw them in Rome on 13 and 19 March 1705,2 and they were in Padua on 11 October that year with Thomas Musters.3
De Grey travelled with James Bucknall Grimston, leaving England in December 1769. Grimston's account book and travel diary (see Grimston) are complimented by de Grey's factual journal (de Grey jnl.MSS) and some of his letters with lists of persons met in Turin and Milan (de Grey list MSS). They arrived in Turin on 8 December 1770, having travelled overland from Monaco, where their felucca, heading for Genoa, had been forced to land by bad weather. They spent six months at the Turin Academy, leaving on 18 May with introductions to society in Vicenza, see Grimston, as well as in Milan, where de Grey condescendingly noticed that Leonardo's Last Supper was 'reckoned his masterpiece, nor need he be ashamed of it'.1 In Pavia on 30 May 1771 de Grey received a message recalling him to England and he was carried back over Mont Cenis in 'one of those cursed Hospital Chairs'.1 A letter from Caterina Azzoni in Siena to Grimston in Rome in March 1772 mentioned 'Your English friend Mr de Grey' finding 'pleasure in a little ballerina, very lovely and graceful',2 but this is at variance with the published account of de Grey's travel journal. In April 1772 de Grey married in England.
Delane spent some twenty years in Italy, principally in Rome, where he was well regarded as a landscape painter. Of his first visit, from 1755 to 1763, little is known. Hayward recorded his arrival in Rome in August 1755 and again in 1758.1 In November and December 1757 William Mylne saw him in Vicenza, and Robert Mylne recorded him in Leghorn painting with Nathaniel Dance in December-January 1758-9.2 In 1763 Lord Hope bought from him in Rome four views of Tivoli (see Charles, Lord Hope), but Delane is said to have been in London later that year, when he was elected a Fellow of the Society of Artists (Strickland). By July 1764 Delane was back in Rome, where James Martin observed that 'Mr Delane is a Landskip Painter & has made good progress in his Art ... Mr Crone, Mr Delane and Mr Forester the only Persons from our Part of the World who practise Landskip-painting are All Irish'.3 In January 1769 James Barry was complaining that Delane had helped to prejudice Sir Watkin Williams Wynn against him.4 Delane took lodgings at the Palazzo Zuccari with James Nevay and Laurent Pêcheux in 1770; at the Casa Religiosi Fratelli, Strada Felice, with Hugh Dean and James Nevay in 1772 and at the Palazzo Piombino from 1774-80 (sharing the same address with Nathaniel Marchant in 1774-5 and 1778-9).5  In 1771 Delane spoke of going to England, but he was in Rome on 6 November 1771 when Father Thorpe commented that he had 'a considerable share of merit in the landscape way'.6 On 28 April 1774 he was passing through Capua en route to Naples with William Parry and 'Heen' [possibly Hugh Dean], all described, enigmatically, as 'Pittori della Galleria Farnese'.7 Parry, at least, spent the next two months at Naples. Delane may also have visited Greece, as is suggested by his Athens landscape shown at the SA in 1776. On 17 July 1777, he was elected to the Florentine Academy.8 On 1 April 1778 Mrs Banks in Rome told Ozias Humphry that 'Mr Delane and the rest of your friends are well'.9 On 26 September 1779 Lord Herbert visited Delane at the Palazzo Babuino where he saw a moonlit scene and other works, which he did not care for.10 James Irvine also expressed some reserve over Delane's landscapes when he wrote on 10 February 1781 that although he painted 'rather in the manner of Poussin' and 'his plans' were well laid down, Delane's colouring was 'a little too cold'; Irvine also said he was then in Germany with Mr & Lady Catherine Beauclerk's family.11  Paintings by Delane, mostly of views around Rome, were acquired, for example, by the Hope brothers (Charles and James), Lord Ossory, Lord Warkworth and George Grenville (Lord Buckingham). Two paintings by Delane hung in the rooms of James Byres, who was probably responsible for obtaining commissions for him.12 Six years after his death Delane was described as having 'passed the greater part of his life in Rome'.13

He appears to have travelled in Italy with Peter Cowling, whose journal frequently refers to an unnamed companion; then in Naples on 26 September 1786 he wrote: 'This afternoon Delavaux was sent on Board the Aldborough Captn Pritchard for London'; apparently having become very ill at Naples (Cowling jnl. MSS).

John Delmé travelled to Italy with Robert Bristow and a governor, and he was frequently in the company of Robert Dingley. All three were sons of prominent London merchants. Dingley was in Florence by January 1733, but Delmé and Bristow were first noticed in Rome on 23 January 1734.1 By 1 April they had gone to Venice, and Dingley left Rome that day.1 All three were in Padua on 13 April, the same day as John David Chavilliard, a Swiss, who may have been acting as governor to one of them.2 On 30 April Elizeus Burges at Venice reported that, amongst others, 'Mr Delme with his [governor], Mr Bristow, Mr Dingley & two brothers, whose names are Holbetch, [William and Hugh Holbech] are come hither lately from Rome, & are all bound home, some one way, some another'.3 On 25 June Bristow and Delmé were in Turin.1 In 1736 John Delmé, with his fellow travellers Dingley and Bristow, was elected to the Society of Dilettanti.
A Mr Denham, probably a merchant, was in Leghorn in 1765; Sir William Farington dined with him and Messrs.Earle and Hodgson on 3 and 5 June.1 This may have been the Joseph Denham, merchant, who began trading in Civitavecchia early in 1771.2 'Mr. Denham of Civitavecchia' shipped nine cases of marbles for Gavin Hamilton in 1771.3 In 1774 Denham was listed as a merchant at Civitavecchia, with his clerk, 'Mr [Thomas] Jenkin's nephew'.4 Ozias Humphry mentioned that Thomas Jenkins had 'procured an appointment for Mr Denham and his Nephew who is in partnership with him that will produce them £2000 sterling a year'.5 Father Thorpe in 1774 said that Denham and Jenkins 'survive all the riguour of satyre &c. & affect a triumph, & well they may, for they are both as rich as ever'.6 Thorpe later described Denham as 'the English Merchant of Civitavecchia, who has a Receipt of the late Pope in proof of his being a Cath'k. & what he seems to value more, he enjoys an ample estate & barony beyond a Mr Fiazione, which he got gratis from the Pope, beside a very lucrative employ at Civitavecchia; in summer he resides at Rome, or at his estate (Onano) from whence he came to Rome a few days before the death of him whom in his letter he calls friend [the Pope] & benefactor, & whose defects he does not now spare'.7 His wife Louisa is first mentioned on 20 December 1777;8 in 1783 they were listed as living with their children on the first floor of the 'Bottega del Sig.re Sarmiento, Scalinata di Trinita dei Monti', their ages given as 41 and 31.9 These apartments had been used by the Abbé Grant who, on departing for Scotland in March 1783, had sold his furniture to Denham 'for a trifle' and 'bound himself conjunctly with Mr Denham for the house rent, for Mrs Denham comes to the apartment he occupied'.10 Denham was still in Rome in 1794: on 15 February he dined at Guy Head's with the Flaxmans, Sir William Hamilton and many others,11 and on 4 November he was writing to Lady Hamilton in Naples concerning the 4th Earl of Bristol's intention of asking Sir William to resign as British envoy in favour of his own nephew.12
As Captain Denis in command of The Centurion, serving under Anson, he made a brief visit to Florence in May 1747.1 In his flagship The Trident, he visited Italy in 1771; he was in Florence by November and left for Pisa with Captains Goodall and Ellys on the 23rd.2 Horace Mann took the officers with other Englishmen in Pisa to dine at Court.3 The Duke of Gloucester engaged the Grand Duke and Duchess of Tuscany to dine on board Admiral Denis's ship at Leghorn on 1 December, the ship being 'splendidly and elegantly fitted up'.4 Denis made at least one excursion to Rome from Naples, returning to Naples on 23 November 1773, whence he intended sailing for Port Mahon.5 It was presumably on this visit that he sat to Pietro Labruzzi6 (the portrait, now untraced, was possibly the 'Naval Officer' by P. Labruzzi shown at the SA in 1776).


A 'very sensible pretty gentleman', Joseph Spence met him in Dijon in May 1731, with Mr [Richard?] Shuttleworth ('ye son of Mr Shuttleworth Knight of the Shire'). Like Spence, they were heading for Italy, and they met up again in Lyons in June.1 The two were in Padua on 14 December 1731,2 and were in Rome by 15 November 1732. They then came to the attention of Stosch who reported that, along with another young Englishman, Joseph Alston, they had beaten a coachman in papal livery, but the matter was settled through the intervention of Sir Thomas Dereham.3 The following month Stosch reported that Shuttleworth, known in Rome as Chatelois, had challenged Sir Toby Birk to a duel for speaking badly of him after the affair over the coachman. Birk informed the Pope and Shuttleworth was forced to leave Rome for Naples.4 Denny meanwhile remained in Rome in 1733-4 in the 'Casa de P. di Gesuiti'.5 When he eventually arrived in Turin sometime before 5 September 1734, Lord Essex, the British ambassador, wrote that Denny had 'made a long abode at Rome, much against his Inclination, by an unfortunate affair in which he was bound security for some debts of a friend of his: I am told He is able to give some Lights as to the Pretender and the several Factions and Dispositions of the people about him; and I dare say, if it be so, besides the Satisfaction he will find in doing thereby his Duty as a faithfull Subject to the King, He will not be a little prompted to it, by the ill usage he has met with from that whole Party during his confinement at Rome, which has raised in him a strong Resentment against them'.6 See also Thomas Shuttleworth.
Thomas Dereham was taken to Florence as a child in 1686 by his cousin and benefactor Sir Thomas Dereham, Kt. (d. 1697), envoy to the Tuscan Court in Florence until 1689. A Catholic and a Jacobite, he was brought up in Florence, where he spent nearly all his life and attended the Medici interest.1 'He is a tool to this Court, and joyned with other frenchifyed English here, doe thwart my Negotiations in her Majties: service very much', complained the British envoy, Lambert Blackwell,2 for whom, nevertheless, Dereham (as Ecuyer de Salle) gave a grand dinner on his recall in February 1705.3 The Duke of Shrewsbury had frequently seen Dereham in Florence in 1701,4 and Humphrey Chetham met him there in March 1705, on the occasion of Henry Newton's offical entry as British envoy in Tuscany.5 Dereham returned to England in the summer of 1703 (with the marchese Rinuccini) and again in May 1725,6 but he habitually wintered at Rome,7 where he became a favourite of Pope Clement XII.  Dereham was a cultured man with an interest in the visual arts. On 25 April 1709 he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno.8 In 1716 he offered to help with the Duke of Kent's commission to Soldani, 'the Care of seeing [the bronze reliefs] well performed and Finisht and of sending them'.9 In 1715 a medal with his portrait was made by A.F. Selvi (BM)10 and he was the subject of a caricature (dated 1725) by his friend P.L. Ghezzi, who described him as a gifted and generous man with collections of rare books and silver (Sotheby's, 10 Dec. 1979). In 1722 he commissioned in Florence a pietra dura and marble heraldic monument to the Dereham family for the church of West Dereham in Norfolk.11  In April 1734 Dereham appeared with the Pretender and the duc de Saint-Aignan on the balcony of the French embassy watching the Carnival.12 During his final illness 'the Pope was deeply grieved ... and continually sent to inquire about his state'.13 Stosch reported his death in Rome in February 1739 and described his Will. The prelate Acciaioli was his executor and received his books and silver; he bequeathed a fund to maintain two Englishmen and two Scotsmen in perpetuity in the college of Propaganda Fide; he left pictures to the chevalier St George [the Pretender] and Cardinal Corsini, and furniture and jewels to his friends.14 P.L. Ghezzi recorded the bequest of a gold-handled walking stick to Count Giacomo Bolognetti. Dereham's elaborate monument by Filippo della Valle is in the chapel of the English College at Rome, S.Tommaso degli Inglese;15 the inscription explains that 'For the love of the true Religion' Dereham became 'A fugitive from his Country to Catholics' and that he 'Abstained from marriage Lest loyalty to God and to his lawful King, so faithfully maintained by himself, should be endangered by his posterity'.16
A foolish Kentish knight', according to Horace Walpole, who encountered him after his return from Italy in February 1760 and 'to show that he has not been spoiled by his travels, got drunk the first day he appeared.'1 On 16 December 1758 Dering came with Richard Phelps to Rome2 where he twice sat to Batoni (priv. coll. and New York art market; Clark/Bowron 216-17). On 6 April 1759 Robert Mylne said he was hoping to travel with him from Venice to London,3 but no more is heard of the scheme.

Mylord Isert' arrived in Florence on 5 August 1769 with Thomas Brand (1749-94).1 Horace Mann wrote him a letter of introduction to Cardinal Albani in Rome, which the latter acknowledged on 27 September.2 While in Rome between September and December Desart sat to Batoni for a dated portrait (priv. coll.; Clark/Bowron 336). On 14 January 1770 Desart ('Milord Giovanni Desert') with Brand, Samuel Townshend, and James Berry arrived in Venice.3
Mighty grave' and with a 'solemn Scotchery' that was 'not a little formidable',1 Lord Deskford came to Italy in 1739. He came via Geneva and wrote to his sister on 8 December 1739 describing the rebuilding of Turin. It would certainly become 'one of the most beautiful towns in Europe', he wrote, 'but its beauty I think will be dear bought, putting very great hardships on the inhabitants ... if any body has a house in the way when a street is to be made straight, down it must go, and in place of the value of it the proprietor has the liberty of building again in the same place according to a plan which the Government gives him.'2 He had arrived in Florence by 15 January 1740,3 and writing to James St Clair on 14 February 1740, he explained that although he was trying 'to reap all the Advantages & Pleasures which my Situation as a Traveller put in my Way, yet to say the Truth they seem to me but small'; above all he was obsessed with the idea of becoming a Member of Parliament, and this 'Desire of being of some Use in my Country' led him to 'an assiduous application to Business' as 'the only Means to attain to, or make me ever fit for this that would be my greatest Pleasure, and every new thing I learned in that way, every Piece of Experience that I acquired would be to me a Satisfaction, because a Step towards my end'.4 Lady Pomfret noted his departure on 19 February.3 Horace Walpole had met him in Rome by 20 April5 and Deskford visited Cardinal Albani with him. He sat to Agostino Masucci in Rome (priv. coll.).6 As he waited for the election of the new Pope he caught a fever, telling St Clair on 4 June 1740 that he was going to Naples 'the next day' for a week and would then return directly to Bologna and Venice; further post should be directed to Paris.3 He was in Florence in mid-July and in Venice by 10 August.7 Deskford patronised both Colin Morison and James Clark, allowing them to study in Rome.8
Devaere was engaged by Josiah Wedgwood as a modeller to accompany Flaxman in Rome.1 He travelled with his wife, arriving in Rome 'about three weeks' before the Flaxmans, with whom they first stayed on the Corso,2 but in August 1788 the Devaeres were living on their own at 23 Piazza Mignanelli (close by the Flaxmans).3 Notes in a sketchbook by Devaere (Sotheby's, 16 Nov. 1989) show he had arrived in Rome by 6 October 1787 and they list prints and books acquired for his studies (as Godwyn's Hebrew and Roman Antiquities, Winckelmann's Monumenti Inediti and Storia delle Arti, Danet's Mythological Dictionary, and prints of works in the Farnesina and Museo Pio Clementino); the longest note (struck through) expresses Devaere's professional concerns and includes the statement: 'the reasons why I draw so viley are first I do not sufficiently consider the subject secondly that I do not endeavour to dispose of the drapery in the most elegant and graceful folds'.  Nevertheless in the spring of 1788 Devaere won 'the Pope's first silver medal for a figure modelled at night in the Roman Academy' and Flaxman, reporting this success to Wedgwood's assistant, Byerley, in November 1788, stated that Devaere had been at work 'with the utmost diligence ever since he has been here on the bas relief of the Borghese Vase in which he has succeeded very well'.4 In December Devaere was finishing a bas relief for Wedgwood of the Rape of Proserpine after an antique in the Barberini Palace, and in his own time was making larger studies in clay of the principal figures; he was working on the casts from which he modelled the relief, and would send them and any others he managed to acquire to Wedgwood. Notes in his sketchbook indicate that on 21 April 1789 he began his second month of study in the Stanze of Raphael, and on 16 May he began work in the Loggie.  Wedgwood had received the casts by 11 February 1790, when he wrote to Flaxman confirming that Devaere's salary should be increased, and that he might be allowed to take up commissions on his own in Rome; he thanked Flaxman for advising Devaere on the choice of subjects to model, and he particularly admired Devaere's models of the Discovery of Achilles and the History of Orestes, although he found the nakedness of the figures somewhat objectionable. He added that Devaere might stay on in Rome. Devaere was still in Rome on 18 May 1790, when Flaxman paid him for a bust of Homer,5 and Wedgwood wrote to him on the Continent on 18 December 1791, congratulating him on making useful connections and asking him to give some money to the modeller Angelo Dalmazzoni.
Devnish' was seen by Joseph Spence in Turin between October 1739 and September 1740, his name marked with a cross (probably indicating Devenish had died by the time Spence revised his list); in 1747 Charles Devenish was a subscriber to Spence's Polymetis (Spence Letters, 421).
Devisme was in Padua on 10 June 1753, with William Nassau, 4th Earl of Rochford,1 whose secretary he subsequently became at Madrid. In 1758 Devisme was travelling in Italy with Sir Wyndham Knatchbull-Wyndham, and was recommended to Horace Mann as 'a Gentleman of much worth' by William Pitt.2 In July 1758 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu considered him to be 'a Man of Sense, and I believe has his pupil's interest realy at Heart',3 and in April 1759 she called him 'a worthy Clergyman'.4 In Rome he had sat to Mengs for a profile drawing (dated 1759; Otterloo) and he was to sit again in Madrid for the portrait now at Christ Church, Oxford. By 10 June 1759 he was in Brescia with the architect Robert Mylne (who had returned to London by 20 July).5 See Knatchbull-Wyndham.
The Duchess, one of the most glamorous figures of her day, was temporarily banished by her husband both for her extravagance and because she was with child by Charles Grey (the future Prime Minister).1 She set out in November 1791 with Lady Elizabeth Foster, the third member of the Duke of Devonshire's remarkable ménage à trois, announcing, for the sake of appearances, that she was accompanying her invalid sister [Lady Duncannon] abroad. Her baby (Eliza Courtney) was born in Aix on 20 February 1792; the following month the Duchess and Lady Elizabeth joined Lady Spencer, the Duchess's mother, and Lady Duncannon at Nice. They proceeded via Genoa and Turin to Switzerland, where they arrived in May.  In October they returned to Italy, arriving in Florence in November. Thomas Pelham (later 2nd Earl of Chichester) escorted the Duchess and Lady Elizabeth and he later complained that attending 'their whimseys' had brought on a long illness. In January and February 1793 they were in Pisa where the Duchess took an understandable interest in the foundling hospital, 'which she complained of to the Tuscan government and by her Grace's representation the abuses were remedied'.2 They were seen in Florence late in February,3 and on 11 March the party reached Rome. By the beginning of April Patrick Moir had been 'closely employed for sometime past with Lady Spencer & her party in the mornings ... in the usual course of viewing & describing the Antiquities',4 and both the Duchess and Lady Elizabeth sat to Hugh Robinson.5 The next month they continued their wanderings to Naples, where Pelham was still with them.6 Here the Duchess, whose favourite hobby was mineralogy, added to her collection of minerals (she and Lady Duncannon had been given private lectures on the subject by Henri Stuve at Lausanne).7 The whole party dined at La Caserta and the King presented the Duchess with an antique stag's head excavated at Herculaneum. While in Naples she received 'a most affectionate letter to desire her to return' from her husband,8 and at the end of May the whole party left Naples for Rome.9 Lady Elizabeth was in Florence by 20 June (when she went with her brother, John, Lord Hervey, and Lady Webster to the opera) and the next day was expressing the (vain) hope that Thomas Pelham would again escort her and the Duchess home, see Pelham; the Duchess, with Lady Bessborough (as Lady Duncannon had meanwhile become) and Lady Spencer arrived on the 28 June.10 The group disbanded at Lucca; Lady Spencer and Lady Bessborough stayed in Italy, while the Duchess and Lady Elizabeth crossed the St Gotthard into Switzerland in August,11 to reach England in September.
The 5th Duke of Devonshire did not cut an imposing figure during the year he spent in Italy. He went with his Derbyshire neighbour, William Fitzherbert of Tissington, and Henry Lyte accompanying them as their governor. They arrived at Turin at the end of April 1768 and left on 3 May: the Duke 'is a very bashful young man,' wrote the Marquess of Kildare, who met him there, 'speaks very little and is bien sauvage et bien gauche'.1 From Turin they went to Venice, where they stayed until at least July. While in Venice Fitzherbert appears to have commissioned two Venetian views from Guardi.2 James Wright, the British resident, was anxious to persuade the Duke to spend the heat of the summer in Florence, instead of returning to Milan and Turin as he intended,3 but the party did not reach Florence until the end of September.4 Antonio Carrara told David Garrick that the Duke 'cuts but a poor figure abroad, and is reckoned dull, if not stupid; he sees but little company, and does not show enough, considering his rank and his fortune'.5 The Duke appears with Fitzherbert and Lyte in Patch's caricature group The Music Lesson (priv. coll.), which was probably painted at this time.6 After attending Horace Mann's investiture with the Order of the Bath on 21 October,7 the Duke left Florence for Rome.  He shared the expenses of a trip to Tivoli on 15 November with Sir Watkin Williams Wynn and in December they shared an antiquarian tour of Rome under James Byres.8 On 30 December in Naples Sir Watkin's steward paid Fitzherbert his master's share 'to the evening concerts in Rome'.9 Their stay in Naples was brief and they returned to Rome in mid-January. Fitzherbert commissioned separate portraits of himself and Devonshire from Batoni (each dated 1768; Clark/Bowron 321-2) for Tissington Hall; in 1810 his son presented the Duke's portrait to Chatsworth. The Duke also sat to Maron (Chatsworth), 'but the face was so very bad that Elizabeth, Duchess of Devonshire, had it altered by (I Believe) Mr Rising, the cleaner of pictures - from Sir Joshua'.10 The Duke reached Turin on 23 March 1769, intending to stay three weeks,11 and he was in Venice with Fitzherbert and Lyte on 30 April.12 General James Pattison saw him there on 12 May 1769.13

He acted as valet de chambre to Court Dewes of Wellesbourne (a nephew of Mrs Delany) on a continental tour in the latter months of 1776 and recorded his impressions in a robustly patriotic journal.1 He described the uncomfortable realities of continental travel: the primitive inn bedrooms, the bedbugs, the unpalatable meals, the early morning departures, when he would have to rise still earlier to grease the axles of the chaise and prepare his master's chocolate. But he enjoyed himself too, saw the sights and went to the theatre. 'Put on your best coat, Mun', his master would quite often say, 'and I shall take you with me'. The travellers were in Italy only briefly, crossing Mont Cenis on 22 September. 'Now we are in Italy', wrote Dewes at Novalese, 'tho not a bit better off than when in Savoy, for the house we stopped at is full of Savoyards & soldiers ... my master being in, half an hour before me, had got a room, & a strange one too indeed, no glass in the windows, no table nor chair, a bed of straw upon boards, a stone floor; I for my part thought myself well off with a mattrass upon the floor, at the foot of my masters bed ... to mend the matter a supper, the washing of dishes, with a few slices of turnips in it call'd soup, a bit of veal resembling a lastling calf, to make up; a few rotten peaches & sour grapes, Serv'd up with sour looks'. The next day they arrived at Turin, where Dewes spent a rather sociable time: 'After unpacking & putting my things to rights, lookd a little about me, to see if I could meet with an englishman ... while gaping at the gate, came up two englishmen both Yourkshire, who came with 7 horses, has sold 6, the other was promised; while in discourse up comes the english ambassadors servant, an englishman, O! thought myself well off, after a little chat went to a public house to drink together, the english custom. Afterwards the ambassadors servant took me to their house, where I met with a very agreeable lady's maid english also, the butler who invited me to come & dine with om. The maid invited me to tea'. He seems to have approved of his accommodation in the Hotel Angleterre: 'The people where we lodge are civil, the daughter rather pretty. I have been repeating english to her ever since we came; this morning she came in as I was making my masters toast & clapt her hand on my back & said how do you do my dear englishman'. From Turin Dewes and his master travelled via Asti and Alessandria to Piacenza, which, with its empty grass-grown streets and peeling walls, was like 'a painted lady who looks best at a distance'. After a night at Fiorenzuola in a room hung with pictures of saints, 'which occasioned my master to say Mun we are safe from the devil tonight, sleeping in the midst of so many saints', they arrived at Parma, where they were taken through the empty rooms of the abandoned ducal palace. In the Parma Accademia, Dewes found an English artist copying Correggio's Virgin and Child with St Jerome and St Mary Magdalene (Il Giorno), 'allow'd to be the best picture of that subject in the world'. 'He came from Rome on purpose & thought it would take him four months longer, upon talking with him he said he had left England about 5 years'. From Parma they turned homewards. In Milan Dewes was especially impressed by the unfinished cathedral and the view from its roof of the plain of Lombardy and the Alps. The weather had been very wet, and flooding made the journey from Milan to Turin a hazardous one. On 10 October they crossed Mont Cenis for the second time. Before leaving Italy Dewes pronounced his verdict on its inhabitants: 'I think the Italians are a set of the most imposingest people I have met with & never satisfyd[,] in generall as dirty & ugly as possible'. On 13 December, after spending over a month in France, the travellers eventually arrived back in Wellesbourne, and Dewes brought his journal to an end: 'home is home after all if ever so homely, & I shall still think there are more sweets & more virtues [in] Old England ... than I have met with in other countries, therefore I would recommend to an englishmans wife, if her husband has not that affection for her she could wish, let her send him to Savoy for twelve month & I warrant her she would have comfort at his return'.
K.r Dewid Inglese Civile da Roma' was in Venice on 30 May 1794.1 He was possibly the Dewitt who travelled with the American John Stevens Codgell leaving Rome on 24 October 1800 for Leghorn; they travelled via Lake Vico, Bolsena, Florence and Pisa, arriving in Leghorn on 2 November.2
On 24 January 1739 he witnessed a Deed of Gift by the Pretender's sons, Charles and Henry Stuart, of 400,000 rhenish florins to the Apostolic See.1 He was presumably the Diccinson who was a tutor to Henry Stuart.2

John Dick was for twenty-two years British consul at Leghorn, where he first arrived on 10 November 1754.1 In 1755 Robert Adam described him as 'a clever little man ... with a glib tongue, quick conception and good understanding, esteemed by all for his hospitality, genteel spirits and sweet behaviour', with 'a very agreeable woman for his wife'.2 In 1757 Augustus Hervey found him 'a good agreeable sensible coxcomb'.3 He lived, according to James Adam, 'with the splendour of a Minister',4 his social standing enhanced in 1768 when, with encouragement from his friend James Boswell, Dick revived the dormant Baronetcy of Braid, becoming the 5th Baronet.5 Towards the end of his term, in 1775, Robert Wharton said he 'has a Noble house and lives in great Elegance'.6  One of the most remunerative undertakings which helped to maintain such elegance, was the revictualling of the Russian fleet during the Russo-Turkish wars in 1770-5, an operation he was compelled to do in a private capacity, nominating his friend Robert Rutherfurd as acting agent. The episode was later described by Thomas Watkins: a German merchant was to have had the contract but Dick, 'knowing the fastidious and vain character' of Count Alexei Orlov, the Russian commander, 'did up a large house for him' in the most elegant English style' and obtained the contract; 'I am told that [Dick] cleared no less than 50,000l.'7 In the summer of 1770 the Empress Catherine II had sent him 'a gold medallion sett round on both sides with Diamonds',8 and late in 1774 she conferred upon him the Order of St Anne of Russia, 'for his great services to the Marine of Russia in the Archipelago during the late war with the Ottoman Port'.9 Medallion busts of Orlov and his brother Count Fyodor by Shubin, executed for the Duke of Gloucester in Rome in 1772, were later acquired by Dick for his house Mount Clare at Richmond.10 Dick interested himself in the fine arts, and formed his own collection of paintings and marble statuary.11 He owned a bust of Seneca (VAM) which Francis Harwood copied for Sir Lawrence Dundas,12 and assembled a series of portraits of his intimate friends, who included John and Oliver Hope and Henry Penton.13 In 1766 he was acting as an agent for statuary from the Barberini Palace; 'I had desired [Jenkins] to give me preference of any thing that was really good, and of the very first class that might fall into his hands', he told Thomas Anson,14 and in 1765-6 Dick received export licences for three consignments of antique sculpture.15 He appears as a virtuoso in Zoffany's Tribuna (Windsor) and at the harpsichord in Patch's Musical Party (YCBA). The Dicks also travelled in Italy. They were in Venice in April 1763 going on to Bologna in June;16 they spent the winter of 1764-5 in Rome and Naples,17 and they were in Rome in April 1765.18 In 1767 Dick obtained leave of absence to return to England; he left Leghorn on 24 March19 and returned in October 1768, bearing the Order of the Bath for Horace Mann; they were in Florence on 16 October and stayed for the celebrations before returning to Leghorn early in November 1768.20 In 1771 Dick was much exercised over the visit of the Duke of Gloucester, who arrived unwell at Leghorn in October 1771 and stayed in the consul's house until 18 November, when he left for Pisa.21 Dick gave a masked ball and supper for the Duke in Pisa on 1 December,22 and at the end of February Dick and Count Orlov stayed in Rome for a month as the Duke's guests.23  Dick's resignation as consul at Leghorn was officially accepted on 6 August 1776.24 Thomas Slade alleged he had bribed Dick to resign to make way for John Udny, the consul at Venice. On 23 August Dick stood proxy for Lord Spencer at the christening of the 3rd Earl Cowper's first child, Lord Fordwich, in Florence, wearing for the first time his order of St Anne.25 When he finally left Leghorn Dick left 'una grossa somma di denaro' for distribution to the poor.26 The Dicks stayed briefly in Florence before proceeding to Rome where they were again to be the guests of the Duke of Gloucester (who was in Florence a few days early in December).27 Within a year of his return to England he wrote to John Strange, British Resident in Venice, saying that his former guests 'do not deign to recollect me', and he advised that 'all the Expences You make on this head, is the same as thrown into the Canal'.28
Dickens and a Mr Holman were in Rome in May and November 1714.1 He was doubtless the 'Dickins' at Venice in May 1715 with a Mr Earnley, Hamon Lestrange, Henry Warner and others 'to see the Fair of the Ascention & soone proceed homewards'.2 He was probably the 'Robert Dickins of London' who had been at Padua between July and October 1700 and again on 14 June 1715.3
In Naples on 19 January 1773, with a Mr Palmer and a Mr Whitbread, Dickins delivered 'Lord R's' [the 4th Earl of Rochford's] letter of introduction to Sir William Hamilton.1 'Wilfred & Dichias' arrived with Whitbread in Venice on 30 April.2 Patrick Home met a Mr F. Dickins in Italy in 1772-3,3 and Piranesi dedicated a plate in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778] to 'Sir Francis Dickens'.


The eighteen-year-old Edward Digby wrote to Sir Charles Hanbury Williams from Turin on 11 November 1748 describing the sexual exploits of his fellow English and Irishmen, the charms of Madame Perron, whom he visited every day, and his plans to travel to Germany the following summer.1 The next year, after visiting 'Dear Venice', he wrote again to Sir Charles on 27 December, having 'just arriv'd at Rome': while he was resolved 'to follow your advice in retaining the most beautiful passages of the Antients', he proceeded to describe how he had met the Duke of Lanti and the French Ambassador (the duc de Nivernois) but not the Cardinal Valenti, and to express his concern over books sent for him to Turin from England; he was also in love with a princess.2 While in Rome he sat to Batoni (priv. coll.; Clark/Bowron 132). Digby afterwards travelled in Saxony and was fetched from Dresden in 1750 by his younger brother Henry.3
Lord Digby was in Naples in February/March 1793, Lady Webster alleging he was in love with Lady Bruce who 'only coquets with him'.1 Digby left Rome on 28 December 1793 with a letter from Count Rumford for Lady Palmerston in Naples.2
John Digby travelled to Italy via the Low Countries and Germany. He was in Padua late in 1709, probably on 15 December 1709 with Dr John Savage1 (since at Venice he said he parted company with a Dr Savage).2 He travelled on to Rome where he met William Forester and his tutor and two French gentlemen, and was obliged to speak constantly either French or Italian. On 20 September [1710] he wrote to his father of the Italians, who 'employ all their witt to flatter you when you are with them, and laugh at you when you are gone, and if it is possible to find a way to your pocket they will do it; however they are so civil as to give you a character according to ye money you spend'; it was impossible to discuss the Roman church without fear of reprisal, since the Italians looked upon them as atheists and disregarded their opinions; Digby was entertaining himself 'chiefly with the Italian poets, who are incomparably good, finding that designing obliges me to hold down my head too much'. 'The Lord Digby's son' dined with John Bellings on 26 November 1710 at Leghorn at the Golden Cross Inn, where they were both lodging, and the two were also together in Lucca on 5 December 1710.3
Kenelm Digby was thirty-five when he first went to Italy and his tour is described in his letters addressed to his brother (Digby letters MSS). He wrote from Florence on 29 November 1789 saying that Lord Cowper lay at the point of death, the Duchess of Albany [Charlotte] had 'just doubled that point and lies in state at Bologna', and another Mr Digby travelling in southern France was posing as a near relative of Lord Digby. He had dined with the British envoy, John, Lord Hervey, on 22 November.1 He passed the winter in Rome, where Thomas Jenkins was his banker, and in January and February he frequently accompanied Elizabeth Gibbes on sightseeing expeditions.2 He wrote twice to his brother (4 or 9 Jan. and 22 Feb. 1790), his subjects including the new displays of the Vatican, how cold marble floors took away any pleasure of looking at works of art, and the conspicuous masks worn by the English during the Carnival. Digby left Rome for Naples on 27 February 1790 with the Gibbes family, and he also accompanied them on expeditions to Baiae (12 March) and Vesuvius (13 March).2 In a letter home (17 Mar.) he discussed Pliny and the Poets, expressed his hope of an eruption of Vesuvius, and recorded visits to Herculaneum and Pompeii and his plan to be in Rome by the middle of the following week. In Rome Elizabeth Gibbes took 'leave of Mr [Frederick] Parr and Mr Digby' on 15 April.2 Digby had reached Venice by 10 May, remaining there until 5 June,3 having visited Verona and Vicenza and having sent another letter home (dated 28 May) with George, Viscount Montagu. The route to Trent, following the better roads, took Digby back to Verona and Vicenza, both of which he considered merited a second visit. Writing from Verona (9 Jun. 1790) he discussed the works of Palladio and Scamozzi and wrote of Francesco Maffei. He went to the amphitheatre at Verona 'to see the facetious Harlequins & Pantalones usurp the place of the Wrestler & Gladiator', and speculated on the existence in Verona of the type of 'beauteous females' on whom Veronese based his 'Venuses and Madonnas', concluding that Venetian women had 'the finest skins in the world'. From Trent he travelled into Germany and Austria; he eventually crossed from Boulogne to Dover sometime after 25 August 1791, the date of his last letter home.



Digges was in Padua on 14 November 1707 at the same time as Lord James Compton and his tutor Dr James Hay.1 The following August 'Mr Digges' left Rome with Compton and travelled directly to Florence, avoiding Leghorn (where Compton stopped) for fear of smallpox. They were to meet again in Florence in early September.2
Diharce was in partnership in Leghorn with Jackson 1736-46, latterly in association with Hart (Coutts ledgers, 20:258, 363, 416, 461, 465; 21:145; 22:261; 23:86).
After the siege of Toulon, Dilkes sailed for Leghorn where he landed on 19 November 1707. He became involved in a dispute with the Grand Ducal court over military etiquette which ended agreeably when the Court invited him to a dinner on 1 December. As he returned to his ship he caught a chill which became a fever, and he died on 12 December. His sudden death led to rumours of poisoning (DNB).

Described by Mrs Hervey (wife of the Bishop of Derry), as 'brother to our nephew ... (the one who married Miss Phipps)' [Charles Dillon, later 12th Viscount] and as a 'colonel of a regiment in the service of France', Dillon arrived in Rome just before 3 March 1778.1 He dined with the Herveys on 24 March while awaiting orders to join his regiment.2 Father Thorpe recorded that 'two military Dillons passed several weeks of the Spring of 1778 in Rome'.3 See also Edouard Dillon.
Charles Dillon was at the Turin Academy with his tutor John Needham in August 1764.1 While he was there he played truant with Sir Thomas Gascoigne and went off to Paris: 'Mr Dillon's tutor, Mr Needham, was in despair at the absence of his pupil, whom he thought lost',2 see Gascoigne. James Martin met Needham in Turin on 19 April 1765, and 'Mr Dillon' in Geneva on 8 May 1765.3
Though as a French general he hardly qualifies for this Dictionary, Dillon is cursorily noticed for his Irish descent. 'Count Ed'd Dillon' was in Rome in April 1778 with another 'Comte Dillon' and a 'T. Dillon', and in May was 'recalled by the Court of France, to join his Brigade which was destined for the West Indies'.1  'Le Comte de Dillon' was in Rome on 3 June 1789 with his sister Mme de Martinville; he went to Naples in July with the architect 'Sr Fontaine' and returned to Paris at the end of the month.2 In 1795 Edouard Dillon was in Venice in May, Pisa early in November, and Verona and Leghorn in December;3 Lady Plymouth noticed a Colonel Dillon in Rome in August.4 In 1796 a Colonel Dillon was in Padua and Bassano in June,5 and in 1797 Count Eduard and Colonel Dillon were in Leghorn and Verona in January and February.6 A Countess Dillon was in Venice with her daughter in April 17937 and in June and December 1794.8 In 1796 'S.a Con. Dilon Dalton Inglese', with her children and a 'Signor Geuvopi[?] Inglese' was convalescing in a private house.9
John Dillon was abroad during most of his time as an Irish MP, visiting Italy, Spain and Vienna (DNB). He may have been the Mr Dillon whom Henry Swinburne met at Naples in January 1777 (Swinburne, Courts, 1:121).

Pretty Mr. Dingley' met Joseph Spence in Florence in January 1733 and he left for Rome two months later.1 Dingley met Richard Pococke in Rome and left at the beginning of April 1734.2 On 13 April he was in Padua with John Delme and Robert Bristow.3 He was in Venice by 30 April among a party of Englishmen from Rome on their way home.4 At Venice he appears to have visited Joseph Smith, for in 1735 he wrote to Rosalba Carriera from London asking for a picture of 'a pretty young country girl ... in the style of the Winter [by Rosalba] in Mr Smith's collection', adding that there was 'no need to say anything to Mr Smith about this'.5 Dingley wrote to Rosalba again in October 1738 enquiring about two paintings he had commissioned from her and was eagerly awaiting,6 and in January 1739 he was told the pictures would soon be sent by sea from Venice.7
James Dinny a Recollect Friar is a tall well made man aged about 27', wrote Brinley Skinner from Florence on 12 October 1734; 'he pretends now to go into Spain, but I am told he goes for England, he has very gay secular Cloaths, with a servant, a thing very unusual for Franciscan Fryers. He studied first in Louvain and afterwards in Rome, about nine months ago he went into England and about two months ago returned to Rome and gave out that he had been no further than Prague'.1  He is probably the Fr. 'Denny', an Augustinian, who resided at the Convent of S.Spirito in Florence for some years. Sacheverell Stevens wrote that he was 'well known and esteemed by all English noblemen, who have visited this city for some years past; ... the income that he enjoys is but an inconsiderable pension from the emperor; and I have been informed, when he has had no money in his possesion, [he borrows] some on his watch, silver snuffbox, &c. to relieve poor distressed English sailors'.2

Mr Dusney', with his wife and two daughters 'and other members of his family', was in Bergamo on 25 April 1795, travelling from Milan to Rome.1 On 20 March 1795 Guy Head in Rome had paid Pacetti 320 escudi 'del negozio fatto con [Luigi] Difney Fytehd Inglese di 520 in tutto'; on 26 June 1795 Disney-Ffytche in Rome bought two busts from Pacetti, and he visited Pacetti again on 11 December with Guy Head.2 'Disney-Fitch' attended the funeral of James Durno in Rome in September 1795,4 and in March 1796 'Disneyfitch' was buying cameos from Thomas Jenkins in Rome.5  It is not clear who were the 'other members of his family', but they probably included his brother, the Rev. John Disney, and sister-in-law. A 'Mrs Disney, wife of the inheritor of Thomas Hollis's Canalettos' was painted in Italy by Guy Head3 and Angelica Kauffman (Sotheby's, 8 Mar. 1950); she could have been either Disney-Ffytche's sister-in-law (who m. the Rev. John Disney, 1756-1816, of The Hyde, Essex, who was to inherit the Hollis-Brand collection in 1804), or his daughter Sophia (who m. in 1804 her cousin John Disney, 1779-1857, who in turn inherited the Hollis-Brand collection in 1816). A Mr Disney, possibly one of the Disney-Ffytche party, or possibly Henry Disney-Roebuck (b. 1775, s. of Henry Woolhouse Disney-Roebuck), had been travelling with Richard Westmacott between Rome and the Abruzzi in November 1795; for part of the way they were accompanied by the architect J.M. Gandy and the painter G.A. Wallis; they returned to Rome via Pontecorvo early in 1796. Disney accompanied Gandy on his visit to Naples between March and May 1796 (returning to Rome by 16 May).6 He was conceivably the 'Monsu Dijne Iycer Pittore' and the 'Diyne' lodging with Westmacott in the Palazzo Zuccari in Rome in 1796 and 1797.7


Colonel Dixon, who has been for some time in the Venetian service is hastening home' (Mann, 13 Apr. 1771; Wal.Corr., 23:296, 309)
John Dixon had arrived in Rome by 28 August 1731, when he wrote to Francis Colman, whom he had previously met in Florence with John King (1706-40).1 He earned his living in Rome as a dealer in antiquities and by 'attending on and executing little commissions for the young English Gentlemen who came to Rome'; he also spied on the Jacobites and was for a time in correspondence with Brinley Skinner at Leghorn. This was discovered by the Jacobites and in January 1736, when on a visit to Florence with Sir Thomas Twisden, he was involved in a brawl with the Jacobite Thomas Chamberlain, which made him afraid to return to Rome. Charles Fane, the British resident at Florence, offered to help him set up in business at Leghorn.2 He was conceivably the 'Dickson' described as a Jacobite by Stosch in 1729;3 the 'Mr. Dixon' who called on Martin Folkes in Rome in 1733,4 and the 'Mr Dickson an Irish Gentmn here settled' whom Richard Pococke met in Rome in 1734.5



While in Naples Dobson wrote three letters to the Rev. John Hammond describing sites which he and George Lucy had visited together. The first (20 Dec. 1756) dealt with the Pantheon of Agrippa and St Peter's in Rome; the second (7 Feb. 1757), with Herculaneum and its artefacts housed in the museum at Portici ('without dispute the noblest treasure of antiquity in the universe'); the third letter (1 Mar. 1757), after discussing the effect of the Anglo-French war on their travel plans, described changes in the appearance of Vesuvius over the last year.


Dod was secretary to Lambert Blackwell, the British envoy in Tuscany, and he acted as chargé d'affaires in 1701-2.1 The Duke of Shrewsbury, on his arrival in Florence on 29 September 1701, found Mr Dod and a Mr Whaley in Blackwell's house, 'ready to entertain me'.2

As George Bubb, Dodington apparently visited Italy before 1710, when the Duchess of Marlborough addressed him: 'Young man, you come from Italy. They tell me of a new invention there called caricatura drawing'.1 He is said to have made a grand tour in 1711-132 and was recorded in Venice3 and Padua4 in January 1713. Dodington returned to Italy for a brief but better-documented visit in 1732, with his wife and her sister (who later married the Italian bookseller and publisher Leonardo Venturini). The architect Roger Morris may also have been with him. Elizeus Burges, the British resident in Venice, wrote that Dodington 'came out of England about ye middle of June last and will certainly be back again by ye middle of October; so that he will have seen all that is worth seeing in France and Italy in four months time, & have spent four weeks of it at Rome, where there are more things worth observation than in any other City of Europe'.5 On 4 August Dodington left Florence, where his party had lodged with the British resident, Francis Colman.6 By 10 August he was in Rome 'purchasing fine pictures and rich furniture for his fine seat in Dorsetshire' [Eastbury, demolished in 1775].7 He met Stosch and Cardinal Albani, who became a particular friend, introducing to him the painter Katherine Read and the sculptor Prince Hoare and subsequently acting as his antiquarian agent; Dodington in turn later recommended to him the sculptor Joseph Wilton.8 By the end of September, having stopped in Venice, Dodington was on his way home.5 After his return Dodington was active as a collector, both for Frederick, Prince of Wales, and for his own extravagant Great House ('La Trappe') in Hammersmith. He had bought in Italy two seventeen-foot columns of Sicilian jasper for the gallery, the floor of which, of 'jaune de Siene, verd de Genes et de blanc de Cararre', was constructed in Florence under the supervision of Horace Mann.9 In May-August 1750 Dodington asked Cardinal Albani to find him 'Four statues, not mutilated ... busts and vases', works of merit and fine workmanship for the gallery and anything else 'worthy of the attention of a great Prince' [Frederick, Prince of Wales]. Dodington also commissioned Horace Mann to buy statues for the Prince, and in 1752 Mann shipped thirteen statues by Francavilla to England, four of which remain at Windsor.10

Miss Dolben was noticed in Florence in the summer of 1772 with the Duchess of Beaufort,1 and early in 1773 'Mrs Dolben & the Young Ladies' were with her in Naples, see Elizabeth, Duchess of Beaufort. She was probably the governess of Lady Mary Somerset and Lady Elizabeth Compton, the Duchess's daughter and granddaughter.
A Dominican friar in Naples, prior of the convent of S.Domenico and of the 'Conservatorio of La Madona di Loretto', he received Michael Kelly in Naples in May 1779 and acted as his 'guardian, protector and friend' until the singer's departure in December. Kelly described him as about seventy years old, but full of health; 'everything around him breathed piety, benevolence, and content' (Kelly, Reminscences, 1:27ff.).
Domvile was in Rome with George Berkeley in January 1717. Together they spent the morning of 11 January 'looking for Greek books'.1 Domvile was living near the Strada Paolina that year, in the same house as 'Trencer'2 (probably the artist Henry Trench). In March he accompanied Berkeley, St George Ashe and a Mr Tyrwhitt to Naples.3 He was in Rome by 29 June 1718, when Francis Panton told the Earl of Mar that Domvile, an Irish gentleman, was in Rome.4 He visited Padua in March 1719 with Lord Leominster (later 1st Earl of Pomfret) and Martin Benson.5








A member of the Pretender's household in Rome in 1751,1 he died of dysentery c.1764.2

A Mr Dorian was noticed in Rome during the winter of 1785-6.1 A Mr Dorian was seen by Elizabeth Gibbes in Rome on 25 April 1790,2 possibly the George Dorrien who subscribed from Naples in 1790 to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave.
The 3rd Duke of Dorset was renowned for his good looks and gallantry, but not for his intelligence. He went to Italy shortly after succeeding to his dukedom, accompanied by his physician Mr Powel,1 his mistress Nancy Parsons (later Lady Maynard; see Charles, Viscount Maynard), and a train of singers and actors.2 He was to devote much of his time to gallantry and pleasure.  He had arrived in Naples from Rome by 24 April 1770, his Piedmontese courier having been shot dead by the ferryman at the crossing of the river Garigliano.3 He left Naples sometime after 19 June, planning to spend several months in Rome.4 Father Thorpe saw him in Rome on 4 August5 and in September the Duke was assisting Dr Burney's musical enquiries; 'I passed few nights at Rome', wrote Burney, 'without hearing music at the Duke of Dorset's.'6 But Dorset's chief concern while in Rome was to buying works of art, as Father Thorpe observed (the dates of his letters given in brackets). He was buying paintings in September (22 Sep. 1770*) and then regularly throughout the winter, often at very high prices (16 Jan., 23 Feb. 1771): £60 for a Magdalene by Guercino; £130 for a St John in Patmos by Bassano (12 Dec. 1770*), £300 for a supposed Raphael Madonna and Child 'scarce a foot square' (20 Mar. 1771), and 120 guineas for Van Dyck's sketch for the Martyrdom of the Maccabees at the Jesuit College (23 Mar., 25 May 1771). He commissioned a copy of the Guido Reni SS Peter and Paul in the Sampieri Palace at Bologna, from Angelica Kauffman-a rare concession by Prince Sampieri (17 Aug. 1774). It may also have been in Rome that the Duke met John Cartwright, from whom he had commissioned two 'views', sometime before the end of 1774 (21 Sep. 1774). In 1776, after his return to England, he commissioned John Rouby, then in Rome, to copy Guido Reni's Aurora.7 Dorset also bought a number of ancient marbles. Three lots of his purchases were exported from Rome while he was in Italy, in August 1770 and March 1771:8 they included busts of Antinous and Pompey excavated by Gavin Hamilton at the Villa Adriana,9 and an exceptionally well-preserved statue of Demosthenes, probably acquired through Thomas Jenkins.10 He acquired two full-size lead casts of the Borghese Gladiator (on whose shield he had his own coat of arms embossed) and the crouching Venus (Nymph with a Shell) then in the Borghese collection.11  Dorset had arrived at Florence by 2 March 177112 and was in Venice on 24 April.13 He is said to have rescued Nancy Parsons as she was about to be abducted from a masked ball by a Venetian nobleman, but he seems to have ended his relationship with her before his return to England.2
He was sent abroad as Lord Buckhurst at the instigation of his mother's family, as much to distance him from his enfeebled father and step-mother as for his education.1 By the time he had reached Italy, however, he had succeeded to the earldom of Dorset. From October to the following March he was in Venice with Richard Lumley, Lord Scarbrough's son.2 Henry de Blainville, in Venice with the Blathwayt brothers, met Dorset and Lumley in February 1707, but tried to prevent his charges from seeing too much of the young men 'comme ce sont gens à fracas à Bals et à festins', but by March he appears to have had a change of heart and had decided that Lord Dorset was 'un fort joli jeune seigneur, qui est devenu aussi sérieux et aussi posé qu'il étoit autrefois vif et eveillé'.3 Dorset was in Padua on 20 March with Lumley4 (who had arrived there by 7 March).

With Ralph Smith of Maryland, he was awarded a scholarship to attend the Collegio Urbano in Rome. They arrived at Civitavecchia on 6 January 1788 and reached Rome on 10 January. They returned home in September 1797, Smith having decided he had no vocation and Dougherty on account of his weak health (P. Guilday, Life and Times of John Carroll, 334-42).
Doughty was travelling in Italy with Charles Loraine Smith.1 Lord Winchilsea sailed with them from Nice to Genoa in November 1772 and they went on together to Leghorn, Pisa and Florence. Doughty and Loraine Smith left Florence on 14 February 1773, Doughty being 'so tired yt he would not stay any longer, upon any terms, so they will pass some part of their Carnival on ye road'. By this time both had been painted by Zoffany for his Tribuna (Windsor), their respective heads 'very like[,] particularly Mr Doughty'; Loraine Smith was shown drawing (he became an amateur painter of some repute).2 Early in April 1773 Doughty had returned to Rome from Naples, where Loraine Smith stayed on before rejoining his companion; on 17 April Winchilsea wrote they intended to stay in Rome 'about three weeks longer'. J.A. Pichler made a drawing of Loraine Smith, presumably for a cameo.3
Archibald Douglas travelled in Italy with his tutor Charles Ballard. He was in Naples on 20 November 1793 and in Rome the following January.1 On 7 April 1794 he was presented to the Pope, with Lord Morpeth (later 6th Earl of Carlisle) and the Rev. Matthew Marsh.2 From Rome he went to Venice where he spent two weeks in May 1794;3 on 1 July 'Arembald Douglas' arrived in Venice from Padua.4 During the summer he was at Brunswick 'and with him Mr Mesurier, who has lately come from England to supply the Place of Mr Ballard, who was with Mr Douglas in Italy'.5 He was conceivably the 'Cav. Douglas' who came to Mantua from Germany in November 1795.6
Lord George Douglas was travelling with George Wood; they were in Padua on 4 October 1722,1 and reached Rome on 12 January 1723.2 Rawlinson recorded Douglas arriving in Rome (possibly from Naples) on 16 March and leaving for Florence, with Wood, on 29 March3 (the date confirmed by Stosch).4

James Douglas (whom Thomas Jones called a kinsman of Sir William Hamilton1) was appointed consul at Naples in place of Isaac Jamineau.2 He was there from 23 April 1780 to 31 December 1784, leaving soon after for England (presumably on leave of absence).3 It is unclear when Douglas returned to Naples, but in February 1788 Lord Gardenstone records that 'Sir Francis [sic] Douglas is unaffectedly attentive and obliging to every British gentleman' in Naples.4 In March 1790 Elizabeth Gibbes mentioned that Sir James Douglas owned a house at Portici.5 In April 1791 the Taylor family enjoyed his company and that of his daughters,6 who were identified early in 1793 as Mrs Gibbs and Mrs Harris.7 During the winter of 1792-3 Sir William Forbes in Naples constantly met '[Georg Abraham] Hackert the brother of the landscape painter' at Sir James Douglas's house.8 Mrs Gibbs, the daughter, is again mentioned late in 1793/early 1794.9 In May 1794 Brooke spent most of his evenings 'close under Vesuvius, at the house of Sir James Douglas, the British consul, a worthy man with an agreeable wife and children'.10 Sir James died in Naples on 2 May, the Diario Ordinario reporting he left behind his second wife and three daughters; elsewhere his death was given as 15 May 1795.11


Joseph Spence met a 'Duglass' in Naples between March and May 1732, his name listed with Lady Grisell Baillie and her party;1 'Mr Douglass' was mentioned by her in Naples on 5 December 1731.2 A 'Duglas' had recently arrived in Florence by 15 July 1732.3
Mr Douglass formerly of Deal, & his wife the widow of the late Dr Beaver of Kent' were staying at Megit's hotel in Florence in late October 1793.1  They were possibly the 'Mr and Mrs Douglas (the Miss Sharp)' whom Count Rumford had met in Pisa.2

He attended the Academy at Turin from the autumn of 1759 to the spring of 1760, and told his father that all his masters were highly satisfied with him; he had impressed each of them with his prowess in another subject.1 He went to Venice for Ascension, and proposed being in Florence at the end of July.2 He appeared in Patch's Punch Parties painted in Florence in 1760 (Dunham Massey) and 1761 (Chatsworth). He met James Adam in Rome in 17613 and was in Capua on 9 May that year.4




Lord Downe was described in Rome as 'a very good kind of young man'.1 He was travelling with a 'Mr Pidou', most probably the Mr Pidow who was the tutor of Lord Grey (later 5th Earl of Stamford) in Italy in 1788, and they were presented at Court in Turin on 29 May 1785.2 Lord Downe and 'Mr Piton' had been in Vienna sometime after 5 June 1784.3
The 'The. Downes' in Padua on 8 February 1702 with Thomas Hearne and Martin Bowes1 was probably also the 'Mr Downs' who advised Charles Baldwyn (sometime before 1711) that it was possible to see Italy in three months (see Baldwyn), the 'Downes' who was governor to Thomas Thynne in Italy in 1705 (see Thynne), and the 'Douns' acting as governor to a Mr Batters in Rome in December 1707.2

George Downing was in Padua late in May or early June 1704,1 and the Duke of Shrewsbury visited him in Rome on 6 November.2
With John Hanbury and Captain Matthew Sewell, he had arrived in Rome by 23 December 1724; they left together on 21 January for Naples, and had returned to Rome by 17 February.1 They had left Rome by 21 April, Downing for France.2
John Downman went to Italy with Joseph Wright of Derby and his wife and Richard Hurleston (see Joseph Wright). Hayward recorded Downman's arrival in Rome in 1774 with Hurlestone.1 There are water-colour views by him taken from in and around Rome (Albano, Marino, Tivoli, Lerici) dated between 25 March and October 1774, besides a Part of Mount Vesuvius dated 1774, indicating a visit to Naples.2 In May 1775 he was in Florence, copying van Dyck, Rubens and ancient sculptures in the Uffizi, having been introduced by Patch.3 In July he was in Parma, whence Mrs Downman and Mrs Wright sent their greetings to Humphry in Florence (apparently the only reference to a Mrs Downman's presence in Italy).4 Downman may have accompanied Wright most of the time he was in Italy.5


Drake wrote an account of his Italian tour (Drake jnl.MSS) some three years after it was over. More like a guide-book than a diary, it opens robustly with anti-Romish passages, and blames tourists for the high cost of living ('The fathers complain of their sons extravagance, when they themselves have spoiled the roads'). After Genoa there is no reference to the (unnamed) companion he had been travelling with from France. Siena is commended as 'much the most eligible place in Italy' with its wholesome air, polite inhabitants and the delicacy of the dialect'. There is a long description of Rome, omitting works of art ('having minutely treated of these in another book') in favour of mores. In wintertime, there being no fire places in the state rooms, 'a large caldano of wood ashes in the middle of the room' warms the whole; the ladies commonly carry a little silver caldano full of those ashes, which they put under their feet, and have another hanging at their arms.' Drake denounces the Cardinals' custom of offering protection in exchange for works of art ('Cardinal Alessandro Albani is too obvious an instance to pass over him in silence, who thus publickly prostitutes this privilege'). The Roman Dogana employed 'an Irish Fryar' to confiscate heretical books ('Middleton, Burnet, Misson, and even Addison') from the bags of young travellers; 'there is another piece of policy in this examination, as by this means, the names and titles of all the English who arrive at Rome, are immediately known at the pretenders Court'. At Naples Drake noted that the King was 'much more employ'd in the Chace than in the Councel'; the liquefaction of the blood of St Januarius took a long time and he prudently did not stay to see it; in hot weather 'the Neapolitans live mostly on ice and snow, which in the winter is collected in a vast cavern, near the promontory of Surrentum, and in the summer is brought to Market in boats, early every morning at an established price ... they have the art to represent several fruits in snow, but the ingredients they put in to give this tincture are very dangerous'. Drake was struck by the ageing Stosch in Florence 'in his figure like Virgil's Charon squallities inculta jacet, which altogether with the bulk of his body, the dirtyness of his dress, and the formidable virtu glass which he fixes in the socket of his eye, makes a most tremendous appearance ... The Baron has instituted an order of the Owl, which he makes a compliment of to those who are inquisitive in examining his collection, or who are desirous to be distinguish'd as a Chevalier d'Hibou'. At Bologna Drake singled out Pietro Paolo Pizoli, a simple valet de place 'the best Cicerone for pictures we met with in Italy'. Throughout his account Drake inveighs against the power of 'priestcraft' in Italy, as when it interferes with the export of works of art: 'Since the death of Cardinal Howard [Fr. Richard Howard], about thirty years agoe, the English have little interest with these scarlet priests, and prelates, who only can procure them a protection to export any curiosity of great value. In almost eve'y town, there is some Irishman, who not daring to return into his own country, sets up for a Cicerone, and imposes on young travellers with copys, instead of the originals'. He concludes that one of the chief uses of travel is 'to learn to love our own happy island, by comparing the many benefits and blessings we enjoy above any other country and climate in the world.' A volume of notes on works of art in Italy apparently compiled by Drake's cicerone is in the J. Paul Getty Museum, Malibu, and a second manuscript account by Drake of his Italian tour, in three volumes, was sold in 1975 (Christie's, 2 Jul.).
After a four-year gap in diplomatic relations, Drake arrived in Genoa as British minister plenipotentiary on 15 August 1793.1 He was officially listed as holding this position until December 1795, after which, according to his recorded movements, he appears to have held a roving diplomatic commission, with Joseph Brame acting as his chargé d'affaires in Genoa. The French wars dominated his periods of office.  According to Lady Berwick, Drake was 'a regular man' who knew 'all expenses' being, in his own words, of small fortune. Lord Granville Leveson Gower, who met him in Leghorn in January 1794, formed 'a good opinion of his abilities' as Drake talked of the importance of preventing 'any little neutral power' from undermining the allies' endeavour to blockade France.2 He was on leave in England in the first part of 1795 when he married Lady Mackworth's daughter, Eliza-Anne. Together they sailed back to Genoa at the end of June.3 Drake had presented credentials to the Archduke Ferdinand of Parma at Milan on 14 September 17941 and from September 1795 to May 1796 Drake was also acting as a commissioner with the Austrian army in Italy. On 23 December 1795 Lady Berwick described an incident in which the Drakes had been surrounded in a country house near Genoa (it is unclear whether by local Jacobins or French forces) and had only escaped through Austrian intervention with a 'a price' remaining on Drake's head.4 Thereafter the Drakes lived in Lombardy, but since Mrs Drake 'hated' Milan ('I believe she had rather be masacred by ye French than remain [there] any longer') a house was taken for a year at Como.5 Drake was not forthcoming on behalf of British travellers and at this time he gave some offence, which was not unduly difficult, to Lady Maynard.5 In May 1796 the Drakes travelled from Milan to Verona via Bergamo and Brescia, accompanied by Lord [Henry?] Fitzgerald and Francis Hill.6 That same month Mrs Drake travelled through Mantua, Verona, Vicenza and Padua where she was to stay a few weeks with her mother, Lady Mackworth.7 From June 1796 to February 1797 Drake 'and family' were based in Venice, visiting Padua in June and Conegliano in July.8 In November and December 1796 Francis Hill described Drake as too ill to submit reports on the war.9 The Drakes left Venice for Udine on 22 February 1797.10 In November Genoa had passed into French control.

Drake's guardians asked the Lord Chancellor for a travel allowance of at least £800, in addition to his annual income of £1800. He travelled with George Waddell and his passport covered Italy, Germany, Holland and France.1 Their Italian itinerary was unusual in that they twice passed from Venice to Rome. They were in Padua with William Osbaldeston on 18 December 17102 and the three were in Venice for the Carnival in the new year.3 Drake and Waddell were in Rome at least from 6 April to 1 September 1711, when John Bellings noticed them.4 They are next recorded returning to Venice, 'Mr Drake and another gentleman', at the end of April 1712, when they met Charles Baldwyn and Burrell Massingberd.5 They left Venice in May, Drake then taking letters from Rosalba Carriera to Felice Ramelli in Rome (her letter dated 12 May 1712), and to John Molesworth in Florence (Molesworth's reply dated 6 August).6 They were in Rome by June, Waddell delivering a letter from Massingberd to William Kent (acknowledged on 25 June 1712).7 Drake saw the Ceremony of the Saints in Rome with William Kent, who wrote that 'ye church being all luminated & finely adorn'd wth large Madaglions containing ye Miracles o' the saints. I belive Mr Drake had anough for he soon left'.7

On 22 September 1742 Drake and Edward Holdsworth set out for France with the Rev. Thomas Townson and James Dawkins of Laverstoke (Holdsworth being some forty years older than his companions). After 'about eight months' they went by Marseilles and Toulon to Italy.1 At Easter 1744 Townson, Drake and Holdsworth were staying in Rome in the Strada della Croce.2 James Russel, who painted a conversation piece (Shardeloes) in Rome that year showing Drake, Townson, Holdsworth and another, possibly Dawkins (but not Maxwell, as was once suggested),3 thought Drake 'one of the most sprightly, agreeable and amiable persons living' and dedicated to him a plate in his Letters. In October 1744 Drake, Holdsworth and Townson left Rome for Naples, running the gauntlet between the Austrian and Spanish armies then fighting in southern Italy.4 Back in Rome, Drake and Dawkins each commissioned four pictures from Vernet in January 1745,5 and Drake, Dawkins and Holdsworth ('notoriously attached to the Pretender ... and known to debauch the sentiments of the young English that he is acquainted with'6) caused offence in February by absenting themselves from a celebration given by Cardinal Albani to mark the birth of a new Habsburg Prince.7 In June 1745 Drake, Holdsworth and Townson were in Venice, where they again met Dawkins and Russel; when Russel left them they were intending to return home via Vienna, apparently with Dawkins.8 They returned to Harwich on 26 August 1745.1  In October 1750 Russel was ready to send Drake his copy of 'a large and famous picture of Domenichino's' (from the Borghese Palace), as well as 'a collection of drawings of the best basso relievos, busts and statues ... particularly of those which have not been engraved or to which justice has not been done in engravings ... they will be done with more accuracy than those done for Mr [Richard] Phelps'.9 There are draft letters from William Drake to unnamed Roman correspondents, one referring to a commissioned work of art: 'En Cas que vous en auriez besoin de plus d'argent pour faire avancer l'ouvrage [unstated] j'ai déjà prié Mons. Jackson de vous en fournir de tems en tems'.10

William Drake travelled with Dr Thomas Townson, as his father had done before him, and with a young Oxford contemporary, Henry Maxwell. At the outset Townson made one condition, which was readily agreed, that he should each Sunday read the Anglican service to them.1 Their journey was described in letters from Drake and Townson, which furnish their itinerary.2 Drake arrived in Calais 'in mighty good humour with our Expedition' and the sanguine tone is maintained throughout. They crossed into Italy by Mont Cenis 'extremely charmed ... with the horrible & romantic beauties' of the Alps (17 Nov.); at Pisa Drake dined with Horace Mann, and in Rome they took 'very good' lodgings at the former Monte d'Oro, then run by an Irish tailor (28 Jan.). Colin Morison was chosen as cicerone, for his classical scholarship; they had 'associated a Gentleman with us, [Richard] Jodrell, & are very particular in sallying forth at ten, taking our carriages with us, & alighting upon classic ground, thus we amuse ourselves till about one'(19 Feb.). At Naples they saw the King and Queen at dinner ('the king made quick haste to get away to his favourite sports, the Queen generally reserves herself for a snug repast in the German manner'); at another dinner Drake observed Lady Orford was 'all smiles' for their host the Prime Minister [Bernardo Tanucci], 'sat by him at dinner, & was not behindhand in laughing at his jokes'(24 Apr.). The party returned to Rome in time for the election of Ganganelli as the new Pope (Clement XIV). 'Out of England, I believe Rome is the place I should choose to fix my residence in' wrote Drake (5 Jun.); 'indeed I have literally had here the fullest enjoyment of Health & Pleasure, Viva Roma'(3 Apr.). The three then returned fairly swiftly through Venice,3 Austria and Germany. Townson recorded landing at Dover on 12 October 1769, after an absence of 'one year and sixteen days'.1
Said to have arrived in Florence on 2 March 1767,1 Draper was the subject of one of Thomas Patch's caricatures engraved in 1768.2
Stosch invariably grouped Draper with Briscow and Andrews ('le pretre Anglican'), and he kept an eye on them - 'Ils ont été long tems à Rome connus pour violents Jacobites'.1 They were lodged near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1729.2 By September 1731 the three had left Florence for England.3

Dr Drew attended Lady Duncannon (subsequently Countess of Bessborough) on the Continent in 1791-4, 'a good sort of man' and very necessary to the tour.1 No doubt he was the Dr Drew who with Lady Spencer called to see Flaxman's drawings at Rome on 22 October 1793.2 Drew ('D:r Drar') arrived in Venice from Rome with Lady Spencer and the Bessboroughs on 25 May 1794.3 In February/March he had confided to Lady Webster that he was 'discontented with the Bessboroughs'.4 He was conceivably the Dr Drew, called surgeon to the Duchess of Ancaster, listed at Naples in the winter of 1792-3.5

Drinkell was in Padua with Edward Smithson on 17 October 1700,1 and they were received at the University as medical students on 20 December 1700.2

Drummond's Travels consists of thirteen letters, the first four concerning his tour of Italy.1 Horace Walpole called it 'a very foolish, vulgar book' and its author 'an Aleppo-factor', and the passage Walpole chose to mock (a conversazione at Horace Mann's) is altogether unconvincing.2 Drummond used Addison's Remarks on Several Parts of Italy as his authority for that part of his journey.
A competent and amiable Scottish physician, Dr Drummond chose to spend his last twelve years in Italy, although he had been offered good positions in Edinburgh. In April 1773 he was attending Lord Winchilsea's ague in Rome, for which service he refused payment but accepted a place in Winchilsea's chaise for Naples.1 They visited the Grotto of Posillipo, where the doctor showed 'more resolution' than Winchilsea and saw 'all that was to be seen, which is nothing'.2 Drummond was then considered indispensable to Winchilsea's tour of the Archipelago, see Winchilsea. Drummond returned to settle in Naples where he became [the first] Lady Hamilton's doctor. 'He does not act as a physician here', her husband was to write in September 1781, 'but is happy to assist his countrymen on all occasions. I have never known him to take fee, tho' his circumstances are by no means good.'3 Drummond's disinterestedness was also noticed by Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke)4 and by Thomas Jones. Drummond had been offered 'a very handsome Establishment' at Edinburgh University, 'but being habituated to the gay, inactive mode of Life which he was enabled with a very Moderate Income, to lead at Naples, he prefer'd it to the more studious & severe regimen of a Scotch University - Being a favourite of Our Minister, and his Lady's confidential Physician ... he lived a great part of his time at their palace, and with the English Cavaliers as they Arrived; so that his chief Expence must have been in Dress which he was very attentive to - at other Times he lived upon a Milk Diet in a private lodging with his friend and Country man Clarke the Cicerone' (James Clark had been Winchilsea's draughtsman on the tour of the Archipelago).5 In the spring of 1776 he attended Lady Lucy Mann (Sir Horatio's wife).6 In May 1777 Thomas Pelham (later 2nd Earl of Chichester) thought Dr Drummond 'most sensible' and well informed about Italy.7 In December 1778 he was attending little Louisa Hervey, the Bishop of Derry's daughter,8 and in September 1781 he was with the dying Lord Richard Cavendish '& on some occasions passed the night in his room'.3 Drummond was frequently summoned by William Beckford (of Fonthill) at Portici; 'one Day, refusing the Convenience of Mr B[eckford]'s Coach [Drummond] must needs ride one of his high-Spirited English hunters and attended by a Groom set off on full Gallop for Portici - The horse taking fright, and the Doctor, I suppose, not being much in the habit of the management of such Animals, was thrown and bruised in so dreadful a manner that he expired the next Morning being the 13th of August 1782 - And on the 25th Lady Hamilton ... dyed of a bilious fever, rather prematurely, as it is thought, owing to the Sudden Shock she received at hearing the News of that fatal Accident'.5

Lord Edward followed the Pretender to Italy in 1717 as a gentleman of the bedchamber in the Stuart household.1 Together with other Jacobites he was in Venice coming from Florence in March.2 Drummond and his half-brother, the 2nd Duke of Perth, were listed in Italy in December 1717.3 In January 1718 Lord Edward talked of going to 'Florence, Genoa, &c.',4 and he was in Loreto and Urbino before returning to Paris in April 1718.5

Lord John Drummond was amongst those who distracted Samuel Crisp from his studies in Rome in the spring of 1739.1 Drummond sat to Domenico Dupra, his portrait (SNPG) inscribed 'Done for Lord John Drummond, brother to James Duke of Perth and one of the Society of Young Gentlemen travelers at Rome in the year 1739'.2 John Murray of Broughton recorded that Drummond visited Rome again in 1741.3
A Jacobite messenger, Drummond ('Mercury') arrived at Pesaro in April 1717 with the 5th Earl of Nithsdale.1 In November 1717 he angered the Pretender by 'meddling' above his station-'you must take your mind down a peg or two lower'-and was not allowed to join the Court; Drummond pleaded to stay at Pesaro 'till it be thought proper to recall him to Urbino'.2 He was in Bologna in November and December 1717 and in June 1718.3
Lord William's ordination as deacon at St John Lateran was recorded by Rawlinson on 27 March 1723.1 Drummond/Melfort was in Rome in 1732 'for a certain lawsuit touching his benefice in Flanders'.2 In June he referred to lawsuits at Liège, 'costly affairs against rich Monks', but Geronimo Belloni, 'the best banquier in This town [Rome] that serves all ye English gentry yt Travels here', was his 'good friend'; Drummond intended to stay in Rome until September (he also then referred to his birth in London 'some 46 years agoe').3 P.L. Ghezzi made a caricature drawing inscribed Mylord Melfort (Sotheby's, 10 Dec. 1979), and Francesco Trevisani painted a Furius Camillus 'for Milord Milfort who took it back to England; painted 45 years after the pictures done for Cardinal Chigi [i.e. 1727-35]'.4
In November 1787 Sir William Drummond completed a tour of nearly four-thousand miles made in one carriage, a two-wheeled cabriolet. It was spent principally in Germany and France, but included a visit to Italy; his travel journal through Germany, Italy and France in 1787 contains accounts of hospitals visited.1 His last years were spent abroad and he died at Rome, 'a martyr to gout' (Commons 3, 3:625).
The venerable figure of Father Drummond, 'near fourscore' was described by Francis Drake (1721-95): 'this old soldier had a troop of horse in the service of Spain, and was employed by that ministry to reconcile the Catalonians ... he serv'd in every campaigne in this and the last century, on the banks of the Po, the Ebro, the Rhine and the Danube. After a multitude of strange adventures ... he retir'd into this Convent of Capuchins [at Bologna] ... nor can anyone guess the reasons that could induce a man of the world to change his sword for a crucifix, or his cockade for a rosary'.1 In 1752 the 2nd Earl of Dartmouth was advised to enquire for Father Drummond ('a scotchman who will entertain you') at the convent of the Capuchins at Bologna.2

John Dryden came to Italy c.1692 with his brother Charles. They were both Catholics and when Charles returned to England c.1697 John replaced him as Usher of the Palace to Pope Clement XI (DNB). Dryden accompanied William Cecil (son of the 5th Earl of Exeter) to Sicily and Malta, Dryden's account being posthumously published in 1776 as A Voyage to Sicily and Malta, written by Mr John Dryden, Junior, when he accompanied Mr Cecill in that Expedition, in the years 1700 and 1701. They returned to Rome on 28 January 1701. On 26 November 'young Dreyden' visited the Duke of Shrewsbury who thought him 'like his father', and thereafter the two made many visits together in Rome to artist's studios, collector's cabinets and churches. Dryden's name occured regularly in Shrewsbury's diary between 12 December 1701 and 23 July 1702, then on 30 November and 7 February 1703; Shrewsbury recorded his death in Rome on 16 April 1703 (Shrewsbury Jnl.).
While in Venice Du Cane called on his friend from Saumur days, Martin Folkes, who described him as an 'exceedingly friend[l]y good man and ... now a very eminent Merchant in London'.1 Richard Du Cane had come from Rome and was travelling with his two sons, Peter (1713-1803) and Richard (1715-44).
A portrait of a young man by Maron, dated Rome 1763 (Birmingham AG), came from the Du Cane family of Braxted Park, and probably shows Peter Du Cane; 'Duccané' left Venice in June 1763 with a Mr Stephenson (ASV IS 758).

Despite being expelled from Cambridge for atheism and immorality in 1738, Ducket became a diplomat, spending the years 1739-46 as secretary to the British representatives in Sweden, Russia, Poland and Berlin.1 In 1747 he was General Thomas Wentworth's secretary at Turin. In 1764 James Martin2 and John Morgan met him in Venice, 'a kind of Clerk' to John Murray.3 Ducket was chancellor at Constantinople from 1769 until his dismissal for 'flagrant breach of confidence' in 1773, when he returned to Venice.
Duel or 'Howel', a merchant with a business house at Ancona, went to Rome to establish trading links between England and Rome; after visiting Fiumicino he claimed that 'with little expenditure ... the Tiber could be reduced to a state in which small ships from London could sail up the river as far as Rome' (SP 98/41, f.152; Walton, 31 Mar. 1738).
J. Duff was Lady Mary Wortley Montagu's correspondent in 1758-9 in Venice,1 where Robert Mylne noticed him in May.2
His name is variously spelt (Duckett, Dugat, Dugatts, Dugeat, Dugud). He appears to have acted as a double agent in Italy while practising as a jeweller. Stosch described him in 1733 as a Member of the Royal Society in London and as having 'lié la fameuse pierre d'aimant du Duc de Devonshire'.1 When he applied for the title of King's [i.e. Pretender's] jeweller in June 1718 he was described as 'Mr Dugud, a Scotch jeweller, settled at Rome'.2 'Mr Dugud the jeweller' was mentioned in Rome by Lord Forbes of Pitsligo, apparently in 1719.3 In November 1722 'Ducat', the jeweller, was arrested for religious 'discours galliards', but his release was procured by Stosch.4 In 1722 William Dugood, Jeweller, travelling from Rome to England was threatened by Jacobite agents.5  In December 1731 his political ambivalence led to his being observed by Francis Colman, the British resident in Florence.6 In 1732 he 'came from England' to Leghorn and was sent to Parma to evaluate the jewels 'of the Farnese's house' and was then employed as the 'Infant Duke's jeweller',5 a position he lost through Jacobite interference from Tyrrell, the Pretender's agent. He was arrested in Florence on 14 September 1733.1 Two weeks later he was released and went to Rome with Sir Hugh Smithson and Benjamin Crowe, only to be rearrested, the Pretender having asked 'that he should be banished from the Papal States'.7 By December Dugood's Jacobite persecution was over, due principally to Cardinal Albani's intervention, and he stayed on in Rome.8 By 1 May 1734 Brinley Skinner had procured him a passage to Lisbon, 'whence he may proceed to England' where, Skinner suggested, he might prove a useful source of information concerning Jacobite activities in Italy.9 Dugood may possibly have been the Mr Duggatt/Ducket who received payments from Thomas Coke of Norfolk in Rome between 1714 and 1717: for example, for a book of prints (17 July 1716), for Duggatt's 'Journey to the mouth of the Tiber' and as 'a present' (20 March 1717).10
Dumbleton, a widower about 28 years old from Surrey with four children, travelled as compagnon de voyage to a Mr Sumner.1 William Blackett first met them at Naples in January 1785,2 and Lord Grey de Wilton met them with a Mr Bligh in Venice the following spring.3 Bligh and Dumbleton were travelling with Mr and Mrs Welldon when William Blackett met them again in Mantua; they had come by the Brenta from Venice to Padua, where they had left their coaches, and intended to go on to Milan and Turin and over the Alps.4

He brought back from Italy in 1759 a scagliola picture by Lamberto Gori of Raphael's St John the Baptist, and a drawing by Gori of Enrico Hugford dated 1757, and he presented both works to St John's College, Oxford.1 He gave an account of events at Minorca to Horace Mann in August 1756.2

Sir William Duncan was presented to the Grand Duke in Florence by Horace Mann at the end of October 1773, while his wife was presented by Signora Minerbetti, Mann's cicisbea.1 The Duchess of Beaufort followed Duncan's advice and moved to Rome for the winter,2 while the Duncans went to Naples.3 William Hamilton reported him very ill in June 1774, better in July and dead in September.4 According to Francis Rawdon it was the extreme heat which proved fatal.5 Two letters from Sir William in Naples, dated 5 May and 24 July, are in the Grant of Rothiemurchus MSS (priv. coll.). Lady Mary moved back to Florence 'the most afflicted widow I [Mann] ever heard of ... such showers of tears',6 though the marriage was rumoured to have been platonic.7 In September 1775 she eventually displayed a white hat, considered a good omen.8 She was possibly the Lady Duncan who on 21 October 1778 appied to the Uffizi to copy Titian's Madonna con Bambino e Sta Caterina.9
Duncannon first visited Italy with his tutor the Rev. Samuel Wells Thompson in 1777-8. It appears to have been a rapid tour. They passed through Milan in November 'without making themselves known'.1 By 24 February 1778 they had arrived in Naples which they had left by 24 March.2 They were in Rome in April,3 and on 17 May they arrived in Venice.4 By 27 July Thompson had died at Gratz in Styria [Austria]: 'I am sorry for Mr Thompson', wrote the 10th Earl of Pembroke '... Who goes on with Lord Duncannon? Of the two, I thought the latter much the most likely to die of a consumption'.5 For his later visits, see Henrietta, Viscountess Duncannon.
Lady Duncannon went to Italy to regain her health. She set out in November 1791 accompanied by her husband and her physician, Dr Samuel Drew, and was to spend nearly three years abroad. Her health improved, but her intended itineraries were constantly threatened by the French wars.1 Her mother, the Dowager Countess Spencer, met her in France by March 1792, and the next month they were joined by her daughter Caroline Ponsonby (1785-1828, later Viscountess Melbourne) who had travelled out with the Duchess of Devonshire (Lady Duncannon's sister)-then in temporary exile with her illegitimate daughter Caroline St Jules and Lady Elizabeth Foster, see Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire. In June 1792 Lord Duncannon returned home to attend his father (the 2nd Earl of Bessborough). By then they had only briefly been in Italy, spending three days in Genoa, where they were entertained by the marchese Borea, and five days in Turin, as they moved from Hyères to Geneva. The original scheme had been that she would return home with her husband, but her health was still not good. 'I need not tell you how unhappy I feel at not being allow'd to return to England', she told her husband (29 May). In October she returned to Italy, and at Verona she was 'quite confin'd & oblig'd to put on a blyster & be blooded' (17 Nov.). She passed through Mantua and Florence to Pisa where she spent some three months, until February 1793; her mother wrote to her there (from Lucca) in December, urging her to 'redouble her efforts', so that she might see her and her sister 'leading useful, exemplary & blameless lives' (Dec. 1792). Duncannon rejoined his wife at Pisa in January and they went on to Florence, with Lady Spencer, the Duchess of Devonshire and Lady Elizabeth Foster.2 Lady Duncannon had already visited Florence (presumably from Pisa in the previous three months). 'We came [here] on our way to Rome', she told her sons, 'but I am sadly afraid we shall not be able to get there. These terrible French make riots all over the world' (16 Feb.). They were able to proceed to Rome in March, where they learned of Lord Bessborough's death. Lord Duncannon, now the 3rd Earl of Bessborough, left on 10 April to return home, where he discovered that the estate was saddled with several debts, including some £3,000 owed by his wife. A gentle correspondence ensued between them in which they resolved to regulate things better in future. Lady Bessborough (as she had become) went on to Naples, but her health did not at first improve. 'I am sorry to hear you have had any thing like spitting blood again', wrote her husband (21 May), but within a week he was able to say how happy he was that 'you are so much better for the fine air at Naples' (28 May). She dined with the King of Naples on 16 May,3 and enjoyed the company of the Palmerstons, her sister and her mother, as did Emma Hamilton, who described the departure 'of the Devonshire family' on 30 May.4 Lady Palmerston said Lady Bessborough had arrived in Rome on 28 May: 'she makes my heart ache she looks and is so ill. She coughs and spits blood again. She was quite free from either complaint in Naples, but the travelling has brought it on. She is so excessively interesting that one cannot bear to see her in so precarious a state'.5 Lady Webster, her new and lively acquaintance, pronounced her 'ill, very ill'.6 On 28 June she arrived in Florence, still with her mother and sister and Lady Elizabeth Foster; she was recovering and, said Lady Webster, 'was much improv'd in her walking'.7 July and August were spent in Lucca, but she still complained of 'a great deal of giddiness & headache' (18 Aug.). The two little Carolines (Ponsonby and St Jules) did nothing to calm her, the former requiring 'a great deal of attention and correcting'; she had acquired a pet fox in Florence and became 'quite a little Italian'. The girls were 'very fond of tying a Mask with the Eyes to the back of their head and walking backwards which gives a very odd appearance'.8  The Duchess and Lady Elizabeth Foster left her with her mother at Lucca, but then in October Lord Bessborough returned with their six-year-old son Willy (William Ponsonby, b. 1787) and the family was reunited. Lord Bessborough had written to his wife from Rome on 28 October saying how disappointed Willy had been not to see the Pope who was in bed 'having tumbl'd off a ladder in his library, & cut his leg very much.' In November they were together in Naples,9 where Lady Bessborough evidently improved, since Lady Palmerston was able skittishly to comment that she received 'company on Mondays and Thursdays and [the recently widowed] Lord Grandison on Tuesdays and Saturdays'.10 They stayed in Naples until the end of April. Willy Ponsonby told his brothers at home that he had seen Virgil's tomb, 'if you know any such person, he lived about 1,800 years ago. We are at Naples. Virgil wrote poems. My grandmama [Lady Spencer] writes with glass pens, My papa is drawing now, he is drawing a very pretty picture, I think' (Jan./Feb. 1794). Willy also described how his mother collected lava and wrote at a table in her carriage, and how Mrs Brownlow North had given her and Lady Spencer a pet dog each. Early in May the Bessboroughs were briefly in Rome, and they passed through Florence11 on their way to Venice, where they were staying with Lady Spencer between 25 and 27 May.12 Lady Bessborough alone enjoyed Venice, and on 22 June they were in Bergamo.13 They left Italy through Milan, planning to meet Lady Spencer again in Munich on 7 July. Lady Bessborough sat to Gauffier in Florence (priv. coll., see Henry, 3rd Baron Holland). In 1800 she bore a child by Lord Granville Leveson Gower, whom she had met in Italy in 1794. She was to die near Florence in 1821.


In February 1747 he was described as 'the only Englishman in Venice',1 and in August he was going from Florence to Turin accompanied by Augustus Hervey.2 In Florence he had hired as a tutor one Davison,3 who had been involved in the Bengal Conspiracy, see Davison 1747.
Duncombe was travelling with the Rev. Thomas Brand (c.1751-1814), whose letters describe their experiences in Turin.1 They had arrived by February intending to go on to Rome, but Duncombe wished to stay until April, by which time the itinerary had been revised. Passing through Genoa, Milan and Verona, they were in Vienna by June and back in England by November. The relationship between tutor and charge was not happy, Brand referring to 'a strange state of secret hostility' between them, but he was anxious that such difficulties should not reach the ears of Duncombe's friends in York.
Dundas met Thomas Watkins in Turin and then in Genoa on 6 October 1787.1 When they again met in Bologna, Watkins described him as being 'very fond' of sculpture and painting and considered a promising virtuoso.2 They were both in Naples in January and with George Pocock visited the grotto of the Cumaean Sibyl.3 Dundas was then one of several visitors at Naples whom Lord Gardenstone considered a credit to the English nation;4 he was still there in October 1788 when Charles Abbot met him at William Hamilton's.5 He may well have been the Dundas whom William Danby met in Rome in December 1788.6
Thomas Dundas was in Italy while his father Sir Lawrence Dundas was independently commissioning purchases from England. Thomas was a comparatively modest collector, his interest being primarily in architecture, which he was to study in Rome.1 At Turin, Dundas, who was travelling with Mr Goguel, a 'Lorrainer', obtained a letter of recommendation for Horace Mann,2 and he probably bought the ivory inlaid tops for which Langlois made commodes in 1763-4.3 He spent the summer in Venice,4 and was at Florence in September, giving 'Grandi Accademie di Musica' and intending to pass the winter there with Lord Fordwich (later 3rd Earl Cowper) and Lord Warkworth (later 2nd Duke of Northumberland).5 By February 1763 he was in Rome, where Mrs Robert Strange expressed the hope that 'Sir Laurence Dundas's son' would behave 'as one of the [politically?] prudent ones'.6 He visited the studio of Nathaniel Dance (who described him as a 'a very rich scotch gentleman')7 and he also sat to Batoni for a splendid full-length portrait (dated 1764; Clark/Bowron 278; priv. coll.) and bought a Holy Family by Batoni in 1763.8 He acquired a Sleeping Cupid by Guido Reni through Robert Strange (although Dennistoun, describing the transaction c.1762-3, confuses Dundas with his father).9 In March his father was expecting 'Thomie' to leave Rome directly for Paris,10 and he was in Venice at the end of April.11 He was still there a month later, when he attended Lord Northampton's entry to the city (29-30 May),12 but he returned to England in August 1763.10  On 15 December 1770 Thomas Dundas made a payment of £50 to James Byres, conceivably for commissions left in Italy13 and he later paid for George Cuitt and Thomas Harrison to study in Italy.

She was suffering from rashes and headaches at Naples, but her condition improved at Ischia;1 she was in Naples when Sir William Duncan died in September.2


In September 1792 Sir William Hamilton sought permission to land at Naples coaches belonging to Lord Archibald Hamilton (later 9th Duke of Hamilton) and his relatives the Countess of Dunmore and her daughter Lady Augusta Murray.1 The ladies were shunned by Neapolitan society due to their acquaintance with the republican French minister2 and, according to Hamilton, Lady Augusta behaved not altogether discreetly. Lady Dunmore, however, was among those who helped tend his bilious attacks at the end of 1792.3 They next went to Rome where Lady Augusta Murray secretly married Prince Augustus on 4 April, see Prince Augustus. Sometime in 1793 Lady Dunmore sat to Robert Fagan, who shared her radical sympathies (the portrait last recorded on the London art market in 1941). Lord Bruce admitted the ladies cut 'a conspicuous figure'4 and Lady Knight, predictably, chose to ignore them.5 From Rome they went to Florence where they stayed indoors.4  Lady Augusta, and presumably her mother, were back in England by November 1793; there was a second marriage ceremony with Prince Augustus in Hanover Square on 5 December. Emma Hamilton visited 'her old friend' Lady Dunmore at Hastings in 1804.6
Dunning and Elijah Impey, two young and successful lawyers, made a rapid tour of Italy during their long vacation. They were in Naples in September 1766 but could stay only three days.1 Dunning was bringing back to England a letter for Lord Shelburne (his political patron) from William Hamilton; dated 25 September, it refers to Dunning's 'speedy return'.2



Duppa set out in August 1796, intending a three-year tour to include Hamburg, Vienna, Dresden, Constantinople and Egypt before returning home through Italy.1 Most of his time was spent in Naples, Farington hearing in the spring of 1797 that he had already passed through Rome.2 On 24 February 1797 Sir William Hamilton sought permission for Henry [Edward?] Swinburne 'and his painters' Duppa and Reinagle to draw around Naples and to have passports for Sicily, apparently without success according to a letter Duppa wrote Farington.3 But the same three, with William Artaud, succeeded in making a tour of Capri and the bays of Salerno and Naples in May.4 Duppa was 'not so much struck with Naples as some are - thinks of trees in England for scenery'.5 He was later in Rome (intending to learn the language), lodged with two matrons: one was made of 'angles and knobs', the other had a face that blazed like 'a Seville orange' - 'with these fair dames, each pressing with her rosy finger his brawny arm, the Platonic Duppa nightly perambulates the purlieus of Trinita dei Monti'.6 Duppa left England a democrat but returned 'a complete convert' in 1797.7 He provided Farington with accounts of the English artists under French occupation in Rome,8 and he published A Journal of the Most Remarkable Occurences That Took Place in Rome [1799]. Duppa returned to Italy at least once, publishing his Travels in Italy, Sicily, and the Lipari Islands in 1828; he also wrote on Michelangelo and Raphael.
The name is uncertain. 'Ducane' and his wife, 'Inglesi Ballerini' were in Venice in February 1795.1 'Ducheney', 'Inglese primo ballerino', was at the Fenice in Venice in April;1 'Mr Duquesnoy' left for Verona in June;2 'Mad.e Duquesney Inglese Ballerina' left Venice for Verona before the end of May.3
Durrell and Pryse arrived in Venice with John Trevor and John Eckersall on 16 May 1773.1 On 30 August they were in Capua, going to or coming from Naples.2

Durnford made the grand tour on the death of his father, sailing from Portsmouth direct to Leghorn.1 He was in Siena in April 1794, and in Florence in June when he wrote describing the dismissal of John, Lord Hervey (see Lord Hervey); the letter reveals that Durnford had already been in Rome.2 He was again in Siena in August, dining frequently with the 4th Earl of Bristol; in September he was back in Florence.3 In October he was in Leghorn, delivering Gianetti's copy of 'il Machiavello' to Lady Bruce.4 He was then planning to sail to Naples to avoid 'the Noxious Air about Rome', and he was still in or around Naples in February 1795. He was presumably the 'Riccardo Turaford' in Ferrara and Venice in April 1795.5 He was back in England by the autumn that year, having travelled through Switzerland and Hamburg.
Although Durno told Lord Gardenstone he was born in England and his father was a Scotsman,1 Hayward recorded 'Mr Dunrow Irish painter' arriving in Italy in 1774.2 Durno spent the next twenty-one years in Rome, until his death in September 1795, achieving a modest success as a history painter. He had left England in January 1774, and Father Thorpe confirmed in June that 'a Mr Dernoe' had come to Rome, 'a painter, & was sometime with Mr Mortimer'.3 He appears to have lived most of the time in the parish of S.Andrea delle Fratte. He was very probably the 'Dornon/Darno' in the casa delle Monache di S.Giuseppe in 1775; in 1777-8 he was living with Thomas Banks and his wife by the Piazza Mignanelli (his age given as 22 in 1777); in 1786-7 he was in the Strada Gregoriana with 'Ermanno Gilly Pittore - 52' (Durno's age given as 40 in 1786), and in 1788 he was listed (but as 'fuori') in the Strada Felice (above Francesco Piranesi).4 In 1790 and 1793 he was living 'by the Quartiere dei Avignonesi' (Rome Lists). Durno was soon absorbed in the artist-community. Thomas Jones met him in Rome in November 1776,5 and a bas-relief of the head of Durno by Michael Foy, presumably made while they were together in Rome (1774-7), was in Banks's posthumous sale, 22 May 1805. On 1 April 1778 Mrs Banks mentioned that Durno was back in Rome after spending about six weeks in Florence and Siena.6 The following month he was sharing a flask of wine and a pipe with Thomas Jones on top of the Antonine Column,7 and at the end of the year he was helping Mrs Banks nurse her husband through his fever, even though he had 'his studies to attend, and his Time here draws near a Conclusion'.8 In January 1779 Durno attended a reunion party for Thomas Jones, back from Naples, with John Henderson, Millar [William Miller?] and William Pars.9 By September 1779 he had completed 'a very fine copy of Raphael's Transfiguration for which he asks 1000£. It is most likely the last copy that will ever be done, as the Monks of the Montorio swear they will give no more permissions for fear some hurt may be done';10 Durno sold it in 1783 to the 4th Earl of Bristol,11 who was to become an important patron.  Durno dined with Thomas Jones on Christmas Day 1779.12 In February 1781 Durno had 'finished two pictures for the [the 4th Earl of Bristol], one the Mourning of the dead body of Hector', James Irvine told Cumberland, adding that Durno had 'shut himself up for several months at a picture of Alexander saving his father at the Battle of Marathon ... The figures are large as life and finely grouped. He returns to England the beginning of summer & intends exhibiting the picture'.13 In May the Alexander was finished, the colouring 'particularly fine'.14 It was seen in his studio in March 1784,15 and there was mention of it being raffled.16 An Alexander rescuing his Father by Durno and Head was in one of Guy Head's sales (3 Apr. 1802).  By February 1783 Durno was 'about a great work to be painted in a hall in Genoa,' having entered the competition for the decoration of the Doge's Palace in that city.11 He was to win a prize for his design (Liguria Triumphans) but the competition was won by Domenico Tiepolo.17 By November 1783 he had completed The Murder of Virginia by her own Father, which he wished to give to the Prince Borghese;18 Parkinson saw it in his studio in March 1784 ('a surprising show of Fire & Animation to the distracted Parent') together with a Falstaff subject 'which he explains in a Manner that makes him a little ridiculous'.19 There were more commissions from the 4th Earl of Bristol. In 1786 he made a replica of his Falstaff subject 'As good as the first one which Durno has got', said Lord Bristol's agent, Jacob More; 'The Imogen is not yet finish'd and the Hector taking leave of Andromache not yet begun but the cloath prepard'.20 There was a Parting of Hector and Andromache by Durno in one of Guy Head's sales (13 Mar. 1802). In May 1787 More told Lord Bristol of his further commissions from Durno: 'he is making studdies for the Large Picture of Priam [Priam with the Body of Hector] for Your Lordship. I have receved the falstaff and the Picture from Cymbeline the other picture from Hector not being suficiently dry must be sent by the next opportunity'.21 By March 1788 Durno had also sold 'his pictures to Mr Cambell [Colonel John Campbell] for 600 pounds'.22  Such patronage established Durno as a history painter and he was frequently visited by English travellers. Sir William Forbes in Rome 'heard his merit as an artist highly praised';23 Robert Parker remarked that Durno was 'very good' (Rome Lists), and Gardenstone, who particularly admired the Falstaff pictures, reckoned Durno 'the foremost genius at this day in Historical Painting'.24 It was his scenes from Shakespeare which most attracted attention. Charles Long remarked 'how inferior Durno's other historical scenes are to his scenes from Shakespeare'.1 Durno appears to have made several replicas of his two Falstaff subjects, Falstaff with the Recruits (Henry IV pt.II; III, 2) and Falstaff dispelled from Ford's House (The Merry Wives of Windsor; IV, 2), apart from Lord Bristol's. Versions of them were sold at Sotheby's in 1992 (8 Apr., one dated Rome 1784), and a large version of the second subject is in the Soane Museum. In December 1788 Durno exported due Scene comiche from Rome,25 and in April 1790 Elizabeth Gibbes saw 'a nice picture by himself of Sir J. Falstaff and his recruits'.26  In May 1791 Durno at last completed his 'great picture for Lord Bristol', Priam returning to Troy with the Body of Hector.27 He exhibited it later that year, and Charles Grignion told Cumberland 'We think it the best thing he has done';28 in 1794 Skirving commented (the circumstances unknown) that Durno was 'like to have a misunderstanding with Lord B[ristol] on account of his refusing to exhibit his picture of Priam'.29  Durno also acted as dealer, his most celebrated acquisition being the Parmigianino Madonna and Child with SS.John the Baptist and Jerome (NG), one of several pictures he acquired from Citta di Castello, which he sold through Sir William Hamilton to Lord Abercorn in 1791 for £1500.30 It appears such funds were necessary since, according to Flaxman, Durno had long been 'connected with an Italian family; and it is supposed that a girl of the family, abt. 16 years of age is his daughter. His expences on acct. of this connexion were considerable, and caused him to be frequently low spirited'; he was even unable to leave Rome 'from an apprehension of personal injury'.31 His low spirits were presumably the cause of his 'jealousy' which disrupted a British artists' club in Rome in 1794,32 but he joined them in April 1794 to sign the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus (Rome List 1794). Durno died in Rome of a putrid fever on 13 September 1795, his health having been poor -Flaxman said he had been 'of a gross habit of body', and Prince Augustus carried a torch at his funeral.33 Artaud later wrote that the residue of his effects had been left to his brother 'and the women who ruined him'.34 Durno's will, dated 12 September,35 named Carlo de Nero as the second beneficiary and Hewetson and Head as his executors. Despite his difficulties, he was to be remembered by George Cumberland as 'the gay Durno, of grand conception the constant owner'.36
Thomas Durrant has been identified by Brinsley Ford as almost certainly the author of an Italian travel journal of 1769 (once thought to be by Thomas Blofeld, 1753-1817, of Hoveton, Norfolk) which gives some account of Rome and Naples, but principally itemises expenditure.1 There are regular payments to a Mr Fellowes, and 'Roberto Felluvij' and 'Tomaso Durrant' arrived together in Venice on 14 September 1769.2

Mr Dusign, an English painter', was painting the Duke of Gloucester 'in a conversation piece' at Rome in April 1772.1 He died of consumption in Rome at the beginning of 1773, his death particularly grieving Thomas Mason, Timothy Collopy and William Parry.2 Dusign may well have been 'Busse', an English painter aged 25, who was sharing rooms with William Parry in Rome in 1771-2.3
Dutens described the five visits he made to Italy in his anecdotal and somewhat pretentious Memoirs.1 An ambitious and intelligent Huguenot, he was persuaded to take orders soon after coming to London. In 1758 he was appointed chaplain and secretary to Stuart Mackenzie, the British envoy extraordinary at Turin, with whom he set out for Italy in October that year (1:166).2 Diplomatic business did not occupy much of his time and he was able to cultivate the Piedmontese nobility (he mentions the Marquis de Prie, the Count de Stortiglione and the young Mme Martin). He found the Piedmontese 'courteous and brave: extremely attached to all foreigners, except', he added naively, 'the French' (1:255). Much of his time was occupied with procuring amusements and advantages for the young noblemen and gentlemen of Great Britain and Ireland who stopped at Turin, but he received little subsequent benefit from them. At the Turin Academy, where the King of Sardinia was anxious that a strict discipline should be kept, their 'spirit of independence would submit to no regulations' (1:225). When Mackenzie returned to London in July 1761 Dutens was left in charge until the new envoy, George Pitt, arrived in March 1762. 'My situation was certainly singular: born in France, brought up in France, I found myself minister from the King of England at a foreign court during a war with France' (1:239), but this did not prevent him being on good terms with the French ambassador in Turin, de Chauvelin. He left on 12 May 1762. Dutens returned to Turin in August 1763,3 to become chargé d'affaires after Pitt's departure for London on 28 April 1764. Again he commented on the wildness of the young English visitors-kicking tradesmen, ejecting coachmen and riding on horseback round the ramparts (2:72-3)-and on 'the facility with which I there met foreigners of distinction' (2:84; he mentions particularly the Duc de Crillon, the Duke of Savoy and Cardinal des Lances). Sir William Farington met Dutens in Turin early in 1765 and thought 'he seems a very well bred, agreeable man',4 but the Americans Morgan and Powel found him 'of more difficult access than any English Minister we had seen in Italy', and heard that Mr Dutens 'did usually take more state upon him than the Ambassador himself when present'.5 While in Turin Dutens prepared an edition of Liebnitz and published Recherches sur l'origine des decouvertes attribuées aux modernes. He left Turin on 6 September 1765 and returned to England in 1766 on being offered a living of £800 a year by the Duke of Northumberland. For his third visit to Italy in 1768-9, see Lord Algernon Percy. In his account of this tour Dutens described how Cardinal Albani in Rome, still accompanied by the aging Countess Cheroffini, could not endure the French 'and if there was an Englishman in the room, he always called him to take a place by his side on the sopha' (2:142). In Naples he met the minister Tanucci who for three hours explained 'a system of electricity' he had formed (2:164-5). Dutens mentioned publishing at Rome The Tocsin, a pamphlet attacking the French philosophes. He also wrote at this time Des pierres précieuses [Paris 1776], and Explication de quelques Médailles [London 1773]. His next visit to Italy in 1777-8, which he quickly passed over in his Memoirs (3:244), was made with Stuart Mackenzie and his wife. The first edition of his Itinéraire des routes les plus frequentées was published in Paris in 1777, a practical guide for travellers which enjoyed some popularity. A 'Mons Dutens' arrived in Venice on 26 May 1778.6 He returned to Italy for the last time in the vast retinue of Lord Mountstuart (later Marquess of Bute), who arrived in Turin to take up his duties as envoy extraordinary on 13 December 1779 (4:60-133). His relations with Dutens were not satisfactory but, as Dutens was preparing to leave, Mountstuart was called back to London and he chose to leave Dutens as chargé d'affaires. He held this position from June to November 1781. Again he was questioned concerning his suitability: 'But Sir you are a Frenchman', to which Dutens replied that 'a man is not a horse because he happens to be born in a stable' (4:77). He left Turin on Mountstuart's return, intending to spend the winter in Rome, and took his official leave of the Royal family on 11 November.7 He stayed first in Bologna and Florence, where Horace Mann's conversation was a 'fund of amusing instruction'; 'I have never', wrote Dutens, 'visited any man with whom I could spend more time alone' (4:96). He went on to Rome (particularly, he said, to see the Signora Maria Pizzelli), travelling 'in a good English post-chaise, in which I had a portable desk for my papers, and a number of favourite books in different languages' (4:122). In Rome the days were devoted to 'researches congenial with my taste, or in walking in the retired gardens', and the evenings were spent in a circle of friends. He was still in Rome on 21 April 1782, but left in May for Florence, where he proposed spending the summer. He had only an engagement to meet Lord and Lady Algernon Percy in the autumn, otherwise 'I don't know what I shall do, and where I may go', he told John Strange.8 He was then writing his Memoirs and had had six preliminary copies printed for approval. Although he was tempted to stay in Florence, which was made so attractive by 'the mildness of the climate, of the government, and of the disposition of the inhabitants' (4:132), he was called back to England for financial reasons. After spending some time in Paris he returned to London in May 1784. In his Memoirs Dutens wrote that 'Life is like a game at backgammon; the most skilful make the best of it' (2:66). He had played well, although the Edinburgh Review was to condemn him as a 'dangler in large houses'.


Having studied as a painter for some years under Jonathan Richardson in London, and become a co-founder of the Roman Club in London in 1723, John Dyer went to Italy in 1724, sailing from Plymouth to Leghorn.1 He went on to Rome where he found the people 'very reserved and deceitful, they seldom appear together but under disguises and in holy pageantries', he told his brother; such displays also prompted him to write, 'tis strange what havoc their religion makes on their minds,everything they do is capricious and absurd, all things take a tincture of their religion. So reason and plain principles of nature are neglected among them'. To a friend he confessed that on many evenings he 'made resolutions to return to England, which the next morning has diverted on the Capitol or the Avertine', and the pleasures of antiquity grew quickly on him. His study of statues and bas-reliefs led him to understand why 'N. Poussin was so fond of them, and called even Rafael an ass to the ancients', and he was able to buy a cast of the Dancing Maidens from the Borghese. He thought the Pantheon 'the noblest building, perhaps, that ever was', and his poetic sensibility discovered 'a certain charm that follows the sweep of time, and I can't help thinking the triumphal arches more beautiful now than ever they were'. Dyer's itinerary is not clear, but he sketched in Tivoli, copied Correggio's Madonna adoring the Christ Child in the Uffizi in Florence (his copy now in a priv. coll.), and an entry in one of his private journals records a 'narrow escape at Baiae, from some banditti who harboured in the ruins there', indicating a visit to Naples. One of his poems is entitled Written at Ocriculum, in Italy, 1725, (Otricoli, near Narni in Umbria). At the end of his stay he wrote to his mother that 'I have gathered, I thank God, enough of knowledge in painting to live well in the busiest part of the world, if I should happen to prefer it to retirement'. He was back in Wales by the winter of 1725. In 1740 Dyer published his poem The Ruins of Rome ('Rent palaces, crush'd columns, rifled moles, / Fanes roll'd on fanes, and tombs on bury'd tombs').


In November 1770 Mr and Mrs Earle were in Rome, where Dr Burney noted a Kirckman harpsichord (one of the three harpsichords in Italy) belonging to the 'Hon Mrs Earl'.1 They were at Castel Gandolfo by 20 May 1771, passing the summer in Cardinal Albani's villa2 where, wrote James Byres, 'considering the heats and Mr Earls loose frame [there] must be a good Bracing Air, for he dates Mrs Earls pregancy from there. They are, I really think good natured wellmeaning People, and had they not lived at Paris some time [presumably on their way to Italy] they would have done very well'.3 Byres said they left Rome early in September, and at some point they were in Naples, as Earle mentioned in an undated letter.4 He had 'prolonged his stay in Rome purely to oblige Mrs Earle' who 'applies to her music most assiduously ... from a Tom-tit she is become very near a nightingale'; she had spent, with Papal dispensation, a day in a convent, and the Pope 'has shown us both many marks of the most condescending distinction'; but otherwise he found Rome 'a horrid city with regard to diversions and public places', and its society generally he thought lacked 'manners & education'; they had seen St Peter's illuminated but the attendant Roman processions were 'more striking for their singularity than magnificence'; Naples he considered to be 'the sink of profligacy & vice'. It is likely that the Earles acquired on their visit Hewetson's bust of Pope Clement XIV which is dated 1771 (Beningbrough),5 a set of views of Naples by Pietro Antoniani, and landscapes by H.P. Dean and Delane.6 A Mr Earle gave 100 sequins for a copy by Stern of Volterra's Deposition in 1771,7 and Piranesi dedicated plates in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778] to each of them ('Sir Egidio' and 'Lady Margherita').
T. Earle and T. Hodgson, merchants at Leghorn, handled a case of pictures for Jonathan Skelton in April 1759.1 James Martin dined with Mr and Mrs Earle in Leghorn in October 1763.2 Sir William Farington saw Mr and Mrs Earle in Leghorn in June 1765; on the 3rd they dined together with Joseph Denham and Hodson [Hodgson], and on the 5th the Earles had Nardini perform on the violin in their house; Farington described Mrs Earle as 'a very agreeable woman'.3 Thomas Earle took part in celebrations at Leghorn for the visit of the Grand Duke Peter Leopold in April 1766.4 With the brothers Thomas and Robert Hodgson he established a business branch at Genoa. A manuscript journal of a visit to Rome by his son, also Thomas (1754-1822), in September-October 1775 is preserved in the Merseyside Maritime Museum.5 Earle & Hodgson were acting for the 3rd Earl Cowper between 1779 and 1788; in 1782 the firm became Earle, Hodgson and Drake.6

M. The Lieutenant-General Earle' arrived in Milan on 23 January 1708 from Genoa and Turin. 'He has shown many Courtesies to the gentlemen Blathwayt', wrote Henry de Blainville to William Blathwayt père, '[he] has spoken much of you to us, as one of his good Friends; even of the journeys that you have made together in the past'; Earle was with 'Colonel Richard, Mr Killigrew, Major of the Regiment of the Queen's Dragoons, and one of his Nephews, Captain in the same Regiment' (Blathwayt Letters, 109; 25 Jan. 1708).

East was in Switzerland in January 1756 when, through a written introduction from Bubb Dodington, he met Voltaire, who thought him 'a handsome youth'.1 In January 1757 in Rome East met Cardinal Albani, to whom he was again introduced by a letter from Dodington dated 12 November 1756: 'un jeune cavalier, à present je croy parmi mes Amis à Florence, qui est sous ma tutelle & qui va se rendre à Rome. Il s'appelle Este d'une Naissance, & d'un Bien considérable'.2 In Florence East ordered scaglioli tables for Dodington from Lamberto Gori, the account dated 1758.3


He was presumably the 'Eddem' recorded in Florence in May 1774 and the 'Ebdem' listed on 15 February 1775 with 'Dam' [H.P. Dean?] and 'Mest' [West?].1 On 24 March 1776 he was made a member of the Florentine Academy.2 Ebdon was in Rome in July and on 8 August he wrote from Florence to the architect Henry Holland, whose pupil he had become, saying he had left Rome the previous week and was sending him seventy casts.3 In November he was sightseeing in Florence with Thomas Jones, who wrote that Ebdon was staying at Hadfield's with [John] Brown and [H.P.] Dean.4 On 15 February 1777 he received a gold medal from the Florentine Academy for architectual designs submitted to the Grand Duke.5

He was secretary to John Molesworth, British envoy extraordinary in Florence. Molesworth and Eckersall were in Padua on 8 February 1711,1 and Molesworth arrived in Florence on 14 March.2 Eckersall left Florence in September 1712 for England.3 Some of his diplomatic correspondence is Add.28893, 28916.
Eckersall was travelling in Italy with John Trevor, and they passed through Capua on their way to and from Naples on 15 January and 23 February 1773.1 In Rome Eckersall sat to Batoni for a portrait dated 1773 (ClarkBowron 359; priv. coll., Rome), and they arrived together in Venice on 16 May.2
He was introduced to the Gibbes family in Florence by a Mr Bell in August 1790,1 and was in Venice in October.2
Eden was in Italy in the course of a year's leave from Dresden from May 1788 to May 1789. In Rome on 25 October 1788 T.C. Porter 'drank tea with Mr Eden, Envoy at Dresden, here with Lady Elizabeth & his child [Frederick, 1784- 1824]' (Porter MSS).
A Protestant, James Edgar was the Pretender's secretary for forty-six years, from 1716, when he was described as James's 'sous-secrétaire' at Avignon, until his death in Rome early in 1764.1 His service was unostentatious, but his loyalty was demonstrated when he declined a bribe from Robert Walpole of £10,000 to become a government spy; Edgar gave the money to the Pretender, whom he considered had the best right to gold from his own dominions.2 He was succeeded as secretary by Andrew Lumisden. Edgar was listed in Italy in December 1717;3 Stosch recorded him about to leave Rome with Colonel John Hay in September 1723,4 and in January 1724, with Hay and Andrew Ramsay, he passed through Turin returning to the Stuart court in Rome.5

George Edgcumbe was elected to the Dilettanti in 1747 following his naval service in the Mediterranean 1739-45. He was again in the Mediterranean in 1751 and during this tour he took Sir James Gray from Leghorn to Naples in December 1753,1 Gray presenting him to the King of Naples on 1 January 1754.2 In February 1756 Edgcumbe spent a week with Horace Mann in Florence.3
Richard Edgcumbe appears in Zoffany's Tribuna (Windsor), as a thirteen-year-old boy watching Charles Loraine Smith sketching; this is the only evidence for a visit to Italy in 1777. In 1784-5 he was in Italy with De Soyres 'a young French protestant of a very good gentleman's family'.1 Edgcumbe's prime interest was in music and his Italian tour was subsequently described in his Musical Reminiscences (1824, 28-37). He had 'just arrived' in Venice on 19 May2 for the Feast of the Ascension and William Assheton saw him there that month.3 He attended concerts given entirely by women (concealed from view) in the Conservatorio dei Mendicanti, which he considered the best of the four musical academies then in Venice. In Padua he heard, and received hospitality from, the aging Guadagni (who had sung in England before 1771). Edgcumbe then passed the summer in Paris, returning to Genoa in the autumn. He found the opera indifferent in Genoa and Florence. In Rome, where no woman was permitted on the stage, he noted five theatres open, of which two were for serious opera. Naples had 'a thorough good opera' and two theatres for comic opera, but during Lent there was nothing but sacred drama. He was in Rome for Holy Week in 1785 and was much impressed with the singing in the Pope's chapel and with the grand mass at St Peter's on Easter Sunday, sung without accompaniment. He attended the opera in Mantua with Lord Grey de Wilton on 11 May 1785,4 and the last music he heard in Italy was Sarti's opera Medante at Reggio (performed without the main part since the singer was indisposed). He returned to England in the summer of 1785. 'Upon the whole', he concluded, 'I was surprised at hearing so little very good ... and still more so at the extreme badness of much which I have passed over unnoticed'.
Edmonstone was Lord Mountstuart's governor in Italy. Boswell described him as a 'worthy Scotsman who has accompanied [Mountstuart] from the time he left England', 'more than forty' and 'good-humoured', 'rough', 'honest' and 'homely', a man who 'reads book as you eat all on one plate'.1 On his return to Britain he became a member of Gibbon's Roman Club.2
Seeking 'improvement abroad', Edwards set out for Italy at the age of thirty-seven in July 1775, travelling through France and reaching Rome the same year.1 Robert Udny had assisted him with his expenses for his tour.2 On his way to Rome he had stayed in Florence, where he was copying ancient sculpture and a Rembrandt self-portrait in the Uffizi in September and October.3 On 2 December 1775 Edwards was mentioned by Maria Hadfield in Florence to Ozias Humphry in Rome as having suffered a misfortune which she was not allowed to discuss, but she sent her regards from Florence to Edwards in Rome on 24 February 1776.4 Edwards stayed some months in Rome, 'but he visited most of the other principal cities in Italy; and varied his route on his way back by passing through Turin, and over the Alps at Lyons. Thus, although his tour was made in little more than thirteen months, he saw what was most remarkable both in nature and art in that celebrated country'. He was back in London in September 1776.



James Edwards was one of a party of four booksellers, the others being Robert Faulder, Peter Molini and James Robson, who left London in July 1787 to go through France to Italy, primarily to see the Pinelli library in Venice which was being offered for sale.1 They visited the printer Bodoni in Parma in August, and went on to Venice. Edwards and Robson bought the Pinelli library for 13,000 sequins (and sold it in two sales in London on 2 Mar. 1789 and 1 Feb. 1790). The party went on to Florence and Rome,2 and returned to England late in October, see Robson. In 1790 Edwards also sold the libraries of Salichetti of Rome and Zanetti of Venice (DNB). Edwards's subsequent correspondence with Bodoni (Bodoni cart.) shows he was in Venice in September 1789 and again in September 1796, when he went on to spend the winter in Rome (December to February 1797), before proceeding to Florence for a fortnight and leaving for Germany on 14 February.3 In 1792 Robert Gray commented that Edwards purchased 'almost everything' from Bodoni.4 He was presumably the 'James Edward' who came to Venice from Trieste with James Forbes on 10 September 1796.5 A laissez passer from Rome to Ancona for Forbes and Edwards, cavalieri inglesi, dated Rome 30 January [179[7?] is in a private collection.6
In August 1770 Dr Charles Burney 'was indebted for much of [his] entertainment and information at Venice, to the assiduity and friendship of Mr Edwards, a young gentleman who was born in England, but has lived so long in this city, that he has wholly lost his vernacular tongue'.1 Edwards was a picture restorer in Venice, acting for the Venetian and later the Austrian government.2 He was elected Accademici d'Onore at Parma in July 1778 with Zoffany,3 and 'Edwards Pietro Venezianio presidente del Veneto Collegio de' pittori' was a professor at the Accademia di S.Luca.4 Pietro Edward's receipt for Drying Oyl, written in Italian, was noted in Venice in 1772 by John Skippe.5 In 1782 Edwards had commissioned four views from Francesco Guardi commemorating the visit of the Pope to the city.6
On leaving Leghorn in 1776 Sir John Dick (British consul at Leghorn 1754-76), left money in the hands of Richard Edwards 'who was my vice-consul' (Dick corr.MSS, to Thornton & Cornwall, Leghorn, 30 Sep. 1776)
The Duke of Shrewsbury saw 'Edwards the painter' in Rome on 10 November 1704. In November 1701 he had been with a Mr Edwards, possibly the same, to St Peter's and the Vatican, and had seen a Mr Edwards in March and May 1702.1 Thomas Edwards was living in the Strada Paolina, Rome, from 1705 to his death in 1720, listed as an English Catholic painter.2 'Uno Tomasso Odoardi Pittore di ritratti Inglese, habita nella Strada del Baluino sopra Luca antiquario' was listed in Rome c.1712 as a supplier of pictures to the British.3 The Coke accounts include payments made in Rome by Hobart to 'Edwards' in 1717, and to 'Mr Edward' on 21 May 1714, both probably Thomas Edwards,4 as was the 'Mr Edward' who had sold 'a copy' to Burrell Massingberd at Rome in 1713.5 He died in Rome on 10 April 1720, 'an old English Painter who had lived many years at Rome'.6
Catherine Edwin went to Italy for the sake of her health, accompanied by her only brother Charles and her uncle (unidentified, possibly Humphrey Edwin, 1673-1747, see Edwin below). They were, presumably, the Edwins in Rome in November 1730 with Robert Jones (travelling with his mother's relations, the Edwins). The Edwins were in Venice for Ascension in 1731: 'Mrs Edwin, a Relation of ye Duke of Manchesters, who travels for her health, in company with an Uncle & a Brother of her own' were going on to hear the opera in Bologna in June.1 Spence saw Edwin and Miss Edwin in Rome in 1732,2 and Martin Folkes met them in Venice on 26 June 1733; he described Miss Edwin as having 'been travelling these 3 years in Italy and is now going to Vienna'.3 On 17 July 'Mr Edwin, his Uncle & Sister', lately arrived in Venice from Bologna, had departed 'last saturday' for Vienna.4


Edwin 'remained' in Rome on 12 October 1715; on 20 March 1716 Kent was sending Burrell Massingberd some drawings and prints from Rome through Mr Edwin, and on 9 June 1716 Kent mentioned that Edwin's father was 'Sr Oumfery Edwin', Lord Mayor of London (Kent letters MSS).
He went with Rawlinson to see van Lint's studio in Rome on 3 May 1724; on 20 July Edwin and a Mr Calder had left Rome for Florence (Rawlinson jnl.MSS).

Francis Egerton was introduced at Court in Turin by Lord Mountstuart on 15 September 1782,1 and in Milan Alberico Barbiano di Belgioioso wrote that 'Mons.r Egerton de' Duchi di Bridgewater cavaliere Inglese molto colto, e mio amico' was about to start his tour of Italy, bearing his recommendation to his brother, a Cardinal in Rome.2 Between 18 February and 3 April 1783 Allan and John Ramsay saw Egerton several times in Rome.3 In 1786 Egerton wrote from London to Belgioioso recommending Sir Abraham Hume, his wife and daughter, who were about to start a grand tour in Italy.2
Egerton was with his cousin Lord Grey de Wilton and others on a three-day tour to the Borromean Islands in April 1788, and accompanied Grey de Wilton from Venice to Padua on 10 May (Grey jnl.MSS 2).
His uncle, Samuel Hill, had met in Venice Joseph Smith, to whom he apprenticed young Samuel Egerton in 1729.1 Egerton arrived in Venice in June or July that year; in the summer of 1730 he spent two months in Smith's country house at Mogliano (between Venice and Treviso). In 1730 Smith and Egerton were already dealing with Canaletto on behalf of Samuel Hill who had commissioned two paintings from him which, wrote Egerton, were to be put on ship in February 1731.2 Egerton sat to Nazari for the fine whole-length which was awaited at Tatton (where it remains) in June 1733 (a modello for the portrait is in the Museo Correr, Venice). Martin Folkes met Egerton in Venice on 19 July and 9 October 1733,3 and he was still there in the spring of 1734. He was in England for his succession to the Egerton estates in 1738.
Lord Eglinton travelled with a tutor, Michael Ramsay who, according to Horace Mann, may have had Jacobite sympathies.1 They were in Paris in November 17422 and had arrived in Genoa by 30 May 1744, when Eglinton wrote to his bankers in London.3 On 24 June they arrived in Florence.4 Eglinton was still there on 21 July, having meanwhile escorted Alexander Drummond on a visit to Horace Mann.5 It was thought Eglinton would spend most of the summer at Florence, but his bankers made arrangements for him to draw money in Rome 'if he should have Ocasion for it'.6 On 15 August Cardinal Albani was hoping to be of service to Eglinton when he returned to Rome and on 22 August Albani told Mann of Eglinton's departure for England,7 presumably from Rome. In January 1768 Lucas Pepys saw in Naples at William Hamilton's a Venus which Sir James Macdonald had bought for Lord Eglinton.8
A Protestant with strong Jacobite principles, Lord Elcho studied for a year at the Angers Academy before setting out early in 1740 'with three brother academicians and a tutor' for southern France and Italy.1 He crossed Mont Cenis and went through Turin (where he met Joseph Spence2), Genoa and Milan to Florence, where Horace Mann thought him 'a vast fool'.3 He left Florence with James Stuart Mackenzie in October for Rome, where he arrived on 25 October and took lodgings in the Strada della Croce.4 He had two interviews with the Pretender, being 'introduced into his apartments ... by a trap door under the table',5 and went hunting with Prince Charles Edward, whom he thought less friendly than his brother, Henry Benedict. Elcho's portrait, attributed to Antonio David (Gosford; probably by Dupra, according to RBF) was presumably painted at this time, and he probably met Batoni, whose Iphigenia, commissioned in 1740 by Lord Mansell, he had acquired by 1742 (Gosford, on loan to SNG from 1978; Clark/ Bowron 59). He left Rome in April, travelling via Bologna to Venice, where he spent a month and was befriended by George, Lord Hervey (later 2nd Earl of Bristol),3 leaving on 12 June for Paris with Samuel Dashwood.6  He joined Prince Charles in the '45 but became estranged from him after a disagreement over the abandonment of the campaign. He escaped to France to spend the rest of his life in exile, during which he made at least four visits to Italy. In December 1746 Elcho joined the Earl Marischal at Venice, where he remained until the following June; Sir James Gray, the British resident, tried vainly to have them expelled. Elcho gambled with some success before the Earl Marischal restrained him. They moved to Padua for a further three months and left in September with a Mr Hunter of Burnside 'to saunter across Europe northwards to Cleves'; Elcho also took a mistress, Mlle Vigano, who accompanied him for some time and bore him a child. He returned to Italy in 1755. He was in Padua on 28 July and his presence was signalled to London by John Murray, the British resident in Venice: 'if he stays at Padua, to be out of the way of Bustle, and means no mischief I don't think he can possibly be in a more inoffensive place'. In December Elcho moved to Venice, staying at the Scudo di Francia: 'it is an excellent place', wrote Elcho, 'for a man that can content himself with amusements and public spectacles. Everything is cheap'. In March 1756 he moved to Neufchâtel. He was again in Padua in October 1761 when Christopher Hervey met him; 'a melancholy person has been walking up and down the great hall adjoining to my room. At times he retired a little to his own apartment and played upon the German flute. The patheticness of the airs and the Scotch turn they had, made me enquire who it was, and I found it to be lord Elcho, banished for ever from his native country for one rash step, and condemned to be a perpetual vagabond upon the face of the earth, and dependent upon the charity of foreigners'.7  His last journey to Italy was made in 1766. Prompted by the death of the Pretender in January, Elcho sought from Prince Charles, the Young Pretender, repayment of the 1500 guineas which he had lent him during the '45, and had unsuccessfully claimed ever since. He arrived in Rome in November, lodging near the Trinita dei Monti, but he was again unsuccessful in his demand; the Prince acknowledged the debt but said he would not repay it until he was on the British throne, and the Pope (with whom Elcho obtained an audience) declined to interfere. He stayed on in Rome until the summer of 1767, shunned by British travellers, before moving in September to Naples. There he met the French ambassador, the duc de Choiseul, and enjoyed the city's gaiety. In November he travelled back to Venice for the last weeks of the Carnival and then set out for France.
Lord Elcho went to Italy with his wife, daughter and son (Francis, 1772-1853, later 6th E. of Wemyss). They were in Florence in November 1789,1 when Miss Charteris, 'a natural character', put Arthur Young at his ease at a dinner party, and the Gibbes family saw them often in Rome between January and April 1790.2 They had made an excursion to Naples in March.3
Elgin travelled with his contemporary Richard Hill (later a Baronet and champion of evangelicanism) whose Travel Notes recount that they reached Turin on 11 May 1756, and proceeded via Genoa, Milan, Parma and Bologna to Florence, where they had arrived by 3 July. Hill then described visits to Pisa, Lucca, Massa and Carrara (where his surviving Notes abruptly close).1  Elgin is recorded in Rome by 24 November 17562 and he took rooms in the Casa Guarnieri below Robert Adam, of whom he had heard much 'in Florence and other places'; having been told that Adam was about to leave Rome, Elgin received him 'with open arms' on his arrival. On 30 November, St Andrew's Day, Elgin and the 3rd Earl of Rosebery gave a lavish entertainment; there was a 'sea of liquor', and Robert Adam got 'beastly drunk'. On Christmas Day Adam heard Elgin sing 'droll Scots songs' at a party given by Richard Phelps.3 Elgin ('Milord Gugliemo Elgin') was in Venice from 18 May to 14 June 1757.4
Lord Elgin arrived in Genoa on 29 June 1791 from Milan, en route for Vienna.1 In 1799 his embassy, en route for Constantinople, stopped for two weeks at Palermo where he met Sir William Hamilton and Lord Nelson. See William Richard Hamilton, his private secretary, who with Lusieri was sent to Naples and Rome to recruit artists.2
Possibly the 'Monsu Eli Inglesi' staying in the Strada Paolini at Rome in 1721-2 (AVR SA, S.Lorenzo in Lucina).

He was in Rome from early December 1713 until after 26 January1 with Lord Dalkeith and Lord Molesworth; he was again with Lord Dalkeith in Padua the following year.2.
Sir Gilbert Elliot went to Leghorn and Florence in January 1794 to negotiate the accommodation in Tuscany of the thousands of Toulonese who had taken refuge with the British fleet when their city was recaptured by the French.1 He was then corresponding with Sir John Coxe Hippisley at Rome in the hope of arranging for some of the refugees to be received into the Papal states. After six weeks he joined the British fleet off S.Fiorenzo.  He returned to the mainland in April 1794 to act on behalf of the British government with the object 'of confederating the Italian powers in a system of General defence'. He conferred in Milan and Florence on this ultimately depressing subject, to discover that the difficulty of federation lay 'in the character of the men who hold the first rank in Italy ... Skilful on small occasions, they are helpless in great ones'. In May he was recalled to Corsica by the news of its capture from the French by British forces under Admiral Hood, and at Corte on 19 June he received the island crown on behalf of George III from General Paoli. The island was of considerable strategic importance for the British fleet and Elliot remained as viceroy while the island was annexed by Great Britain.  At the end of 1794 he was joined by his wife and children, who made two visits to the mainland on their own in the summer of 1795 to the baths at Lucca. They were again on the mainland in the summer of 1796, but their stay in Pisa was cut short by the advance of the French armies into Tuscany. Returning hurriedly to Leghorn they sailed for Corsica on 25 June within hours of the French entry into the town. Later in 1796 Lady Elliot and her children visited Naples, where they had friendly and informal meetings with the Queen Maria Carolina and the royal children. They sailed for Gibraltar and home on 23 October 1796. Elliot left Corsica on 26 October 1796 and went to Naples where he was warmly received by the King and Queen. He wrote to his wife from Naples 'I have been as prudent as I can about buying pictures and drawings, but cannot entirely refrain'. On 25 December he visited the Papal court in Rome in order to ascertain that they would not easily submit to the French. On 12 January 1797 he witnessed the wedding in Naples of Elizabeth Wynne and Captain Thomas Fremantle. On the 15th he sailed from Naples to join Nelson at Port Ferraio and he was present at the battle of St Vincent on 14 February. He finally returned to Plymouth on 5 March 1797.
Possibly the Cap. Elliot, the subject of an engraved caricature by Patch, who recurs in Patch's Artist's Studio (WSL).


They were Scottish friends of Lady Charlotte Burgoyne, and met Robert Adam in Rome in 1755. Adam described Mrs Elliott as 'a good-natured, clever little woman' and her husband as 'a most insignificant trifling mortal', much given to 'genteelity. The Orders of Knighthood, Stars, Garters and Ribbons are his constant talk'. Mrs Elliott was also a lively companion for Allan Ramsay's wife. The Elliotts, said Adam, provided excellent weekly supper parties in Rome, after which he would frequently stroll past the Spanish Steps to the Pincio with Mrs Elliott and the Abbé Grant. In the winter of 1756-7 Adam found that Mrs Elliott and the Abbé Grant were his most faithful companions, and he described Mrs Elliott singing merry French songs at Richard Phelps's Christmas party in 1756.1 They were, presumably, the 'Mr & Mrs Elyott' at Massa with whom the Abbé Grant spent eight days on his return from France in the summer of 1767: they were 'overjoyed' to see him and asked after James and Robert Adam.2 In 1779 John Collet, the British consul in Genoa, introduced 'Mr Elyot' to Poyntz (chargé d'affaires at Turin) as 'a very worthy friend of [Joseph] Brame's and mine'; he was 'of a very antient family and formerly with his wife liv'd a great deal in the world, for some years past they have liv'd rather retir'd at Massa [fifty miles north of Pisa], very genteely and much respected by every body that knows them'.3
One Elliott, whose father was a capt. of ye guard when King James left England & served King Wm (formerly a midshipman but now a Papist &c)' came from Pisa, where he had met Dr Sharp, to Florence in May 1732 (SP 98/33, Colman, 5 May 1732).'Eliott' passed through Capua on his way to Naples on 26 December 1763.1 On 31 December he was dining with Lords Exeter and Palmerston in Naples.2

Henry Ellis had just returned from Italy in 1746 when he joined an expedition in search of the north-west passage (DNB).  On retirement from his colonial governorships, as 'a gentleman of uncommon talents, and considerable fortune', Ellis was in the habit of wintering abroad, 'in the South of France, or in Italy; mostly at Marseilles'.1 Thus he was in Florence with Horace Mann in November 1764; Edward Gibbon saw him in Naples in January 1765, and James Boswell met him in Genoa in December 1765.2 'Il Governatore Cliss - inglese' was staying near the Piazza di Spagna in Rome at Easter 1771,3 and in 1772 came from Pisa to Leghorn whence he sailed on the 22nd for Marseilles and London.4 He was in Pisa in November 1793, March 1794 and January 1795.5
I have already observed how great a liar this prelate is', wrote the Duke of Shrewsbury who had met the Bishop frequently in Rome from November 1701, sometimes in the Vatican Library, on other occasions conveying Jacobite intelligence; he frequently had audiences with the Pope (Shrewsbury Jnl., betw. 26 Nov. 1701 and 23 Jul. 1704).
On 21 and 22 November 1739, with a 'Mr Grevall' [Greville], he dined with Sir Roger Newdigate in Florence; Greville alone dined with Sir Roger on 10 December.1 In August 1740 Joseph Spence met Ellis and Greville staying near Turin; he thought Ellis a 'very sober, very sensible & of a very good taste'.2 Ellis subsequently formed a small collection of antiquities largely acquired from Gavin Hamilton in the 1760s and 1770s.3
Ellis was closely attached to the exiled Jacobite court in Italy after 1717. He appears first to have acted as treasurer to the court (according to the many mentions of him in HMC Stuart) but in 1727 he succeeded John Hay (the Jacobite Lord Inverness) as the Pretender's secretary.1 He died in Rome in August 1732 and was buried in the Protestant cemetery, his age given as approximately 90 (Nylander, 246-7).
Mr Ellis joined Lady Webster's party, travelling with them from Nice to Venice. There he contracted a putrid fever but recovered sufficiently to continue with them to Florence, where he decided to return home (Holland Jnl., 1:7-15).
Ellison travelled in Italy with Dr Wilkinson Blanshard (who wished 'not to have his profession noticed'1). They were in Rome by 25 April 1764, enjoying the celebrations held for the visit of the Duke of York.2 On 23 May they passed through Capua,3 presumably returning from Naples, since on 27 May James Martin met them in Rome. On 18 June they visited Tivoli with Martin and James Byres.4 While at Rome Ellison sat to Batoni, the portrait dated 1764 (priv. coll.; Clark/Bowron 267). On 6 July they arrived in Florence, where they dined with Edward Gibbon at Horace Mann's; on 30 July Gibbon again dined with them and noted that Ellison was a kinsman of Lord Ravensworth (formerly Sir Henry Liddell); 'c'est un homme de mérite. Il possède le bon sens, des connoissances et un caractère qui paroit doux et tranquille. Blanchard est médecin, comme il a été malade ici je le connois beaucoup moins que son compagnon'. They later went with Lord Palmerston 'to sup at a country house Charles [Hadfield] has about a mile out of Florence'.5 They left Florence on 1 August6 and again met James Martin in Bologna on 9 August; on the 12th they all went 'to a Villa abt. 6 miles from Bologna where we were entertained with a Horse race, Fireworks, a Tragedy, a Comedy, & Dancing - stayed all Night'.7


Capt Elphinstone, son to Lord Balmerino' had arrived in Leghorn from Rome by 10 January 1733 'to go to France on affairs of moment' (SP 98/34 (Skinner, 19 Nov. 1732).

Elwood arrived in Rome in November 1726 with two companions, Bateman and Wolf (possibly W. Woolfe, a bearleader); Stosch reported that 'Dr Elwood Irlandois' had left Rome on 1 March 1727 with Arthur Pond and on 22 March he confirmed the departure of Wolf, Bateman and Elwood (SP 85/15, ff.172, 228, 235).




Englefield had lodged in Siena 'for a long time' when George Langton met him there on 1 March 1738.1 He was daily expected in Rome on 8 January 1739, and was seen there on 18 April.2 Between 8 September and 13 December 1739 Lady Pomfret saw him in Siena,3 and by 17 May he was in Venice, having left Florence in snow.4 Joseph Spence saw him in Turin before September 1740.5


Ennis was sent to Italy by Arthur Jones Nevill, Surveyor General of Ireland. He was in Rome by 26 January 1754, when he was mentioned by Cardinal Albani as being in alliance with the Abbé Grant over an altercation with his rival, Thomas Jenkins.1 In 1755 he was living in the same house as Robert Crone and James Forrester in the Strada della Croce, and in 1756 with Forrester alone.2 In November 1754 Ennis came seventh in the first class of painting at the triennial competition of the Accademia di S.Luca.3 He attended the Accademia del Nudo during its first summer session and again in the following winter, when he would have been instructed in drawing from the live model by Mengs and Batoni4 Ennis won third prize both in the Concorso Nudo of June 1755 and January 1756. Both prizewinning drawings remain in the collection of the Archive of the Accademia Nazionale di S.Luca, Rome.  Ennis also copied after antique statuary both in Rome and Florence. He sold his drawings, including those of the Laocoon, the Apollo Belvedere, the Dancing Faun and the Venus de Medici in Florence, to Stephen Beckingham.5 Ennis left Rome in July 17566 and in 1757 he spent 'some weeks to paint portraits' in Gibraltar.7  On his return from Italy, Ennis painted the cove of Arthur Jones Nevill's drawing room in 14 Rutland Square with lunettes after Pietro da Cortona's decorations in the Palazzo Pitti, Florence; three of Ennis's panels are now in the NGI.
Described as 'quiet, sensible, not handsome, but genteel and unaffected',1 she had made an unsuccessful marriage. In 1778 her father commented to Lady Elizabeth Foster that her poor sister was 'exhausted, worn out, and can no more. He [Lord Erne] tries her to atoms by his silly difficulties and his endless irresolutions. Great God, how ill she is matched'.2 Rather than seeking a divorce, Lady Erne took to travelling with her only daughter, Lady Caroline (b. 1779).  She accompanied her father, the 4th Earl of Bristol, to Italy late in 1785. Henry Quin saw them all together in Rome on 17 January 1786.3 When her father returned home, Lady Erne and her young daughter travelled northwards, going from Leghorn to Genoa with her sister-in-law Lady Hervey (see John, Lord Hervey). They went on to Evian-les-Bains. In a large miniature by Ludwig Guttenbrunn dated 1786 (priv. coll.), dateable late August/early September, she is seen taking tea with the Prince and Princess of Piedmont, with Lady Hervey, Lady Caroline and her niece the Hon. Elizabeth Hervey.4  Lady Erne and her daughter returned to Rome for the winter of 1786-7 and they apparently made Rome their home for about four years. They visited Naples in January 1787 when they were again with John, Lord Hervey, and Lady Hervey.5 In December 1787 Lady Erne and Lady Hervey were noticed in Rome.6 In 1788 Lady Erne and Lady Caroline were in Florence with her brother John, Lord Hervey; here Lady Caroline again met her aunt, Lady Hervey, and her cousin, the Hon. Elizabeth Hervey. They returned to Rome for the winter of 1788-9.7 The bust of Lady Caroline by Hewetson (priv. coll.),8 was presumably done in this period, and Lady Caroline also sat to Carlo Labruzzi (the portrait untraced), whose death she lamented when she was back in Rome (as Lady Wharncliffe) for her last visit in 1818.9 A drawing of a female figure surrounded by putti, with the aquatint from it signed and dated the Hon. Caroline Creighton, Roma, 1789, was formerly in Paul Oppé's collection. On 14 October 1789 Lady Erne, her daughter and Mr Hervey (presumably Frederick William) stayed at the Hotel S.Marco at Bologna.10 In December 1789 the 4th Earl of Bristol was back in Rome and it was presumably he who then commissioned H.D. Hamilton to paint the two charming whole-length portraits of Lady Erne and her daughter (priv. coll.). A third portrait by Hamilton shows the 4th Earl with his grand-daughter (NGI).  'Il Cavaliere Erle, con sua moglie' in Venice on 21 May 1790 were conceivably the Ernes.11
Errington, a Catholic, had spent at least a year on the Continent before meeting Laurence Sterne in Rome in December 1765. Sterne had known him 'these three years' and thought him 'a good hearted young gentleman'.1 They travelled together to Naples and back to Rome in March 1766, when Sterne left him. They met again in York in August that year.2  In 1774 Errington returned to Italy with his wife, Lady Broughton-Delves. They were in Florence by 26 November.3 Father Thorpe and James Byres saw them in Rome in December 1774,4 and Errington wrote from Milan on 12 May 1775 to John Strange, the British resident at Venice, thanking him for his hospitality in Venice.5
Charles Erskine's father, wrote Sir William Forbes, 'a younger son of Erskine of Cambo in Fife had gone abroad after the year 1715, in the disturbances of which he had been engaged',1 and Father Thorpe described his father as 'a domestic in Old Chevalier's service'2 (but see Colin Erskine). Born in Rome, Charles studied at the Scots College in Rome from 1749 to 1753,3 where he acquired a strong Scottish accent which marked his fluent English.1 He transcribed 'the parchments and papers relative to Scotland' from the Vatican archives for Lord Buchan (David Steuart Erskine).4

The inscription on a profile portrait drawing of Colin Erskine in the Scots College, Rome, records his parentage and his death in Rome on 18 January 1740, aged 35. His son, who became Cardinal Charles Erskine, was born in Rome in 1739. 'Nicola Asturin - Scozzese' aged 33 was living on the Strada Felice in 1738 with his wife 'Agata Gigli' and two children, Maria Clementina aged 3 and Agata aged 6; a third, Carlo (see Charles Erskine) aged three months, was listed in 1739; the Pretender's doctor, James Murray, was sharing the same address.1 'Nicolas Araschini', recorded in Rome in 1733 aged 29 is doubtless the same (though he was said, evidently incorrectly, to be still there in 1743).2
Ten. Gen. Don Davide Areskin' died in Tuscany in 1778, leaving his estate to Charles, Clementine and Francis ('Don Carlo, Donna Clementina, Don Francesco Areskin'). The settlement was in dispute in Naples until 1787.1 See also Brigadier Areskin.
He may have been the David Erskine of Cambo who is said to have travelled to Italy with the Scottish artist John Brown in 1769.  A David Erskine ('Arskine'), painter, was copying in the Uffizi in August 1775, August 1776, June and December 1778 and in January 1779 and January 1780;1 he was doubtless the Erskine who visited the exhibition at the Accademia di S.Luca in Rome on 18 October 1777 with Thomas Jones, Henry Tresham, Northcote and John Henderson.2
He was presumably the David Erskine who had gone to Naples for the sake of his health with 'Mrs Erskine and one of his nieces'; in 1792/3 Sir William Forbes, writing of the Corcelli hotel in Naples, said 'my poor friend David Erskine had resided there' (Forbes jnl.MSS, winter 1792/3).

A Jacobite courtier in Italy, he acted as interpreter for the Earl of Mar with Cardinal Gualterio in Rome in April 1718 (HMC Stuart, 5:429, 434, 603; 6:221, 278)

The 3rd Earl of Essex first went to Italy as a young man with his tutor Gabriel Liniere. They were in Padua on 23 October 1714.1 They spent some time in Venice and then in February 1715 set off with Lord Morpeth (later 4th Earl of Carlisle) for Rome2 where Kent noticed them on 16 April 1715.3 Essex was expected in Geneva 'in a day or two' on 7 December 1716,4 but he lingered in Venice where, in February 1717, Alexander Cunningham reported that he had 'been going from hence to ffrance these six months'.5  In 1731 Lord Essex was appointed minister plenipotentiary at Turin, principally to mediate (unsuccessfully) in a treaty between the Emperor and the King of Sardinia, and in 1732 he was confirmed as ambassador to Turin, a post he held until July 1736.6 In terms of nobility he was the highest ranking British diplomat of the time and he appears to have lived grandly, with a country seat 'near [Turin] among the hills'.7 He was evidently addicted to the opera and in 1734 he acquired the works of the dramatist and librettist Metastasio.8 He made several visits to other parts of Italy and he was on leave in England from December 1734 to May 1735 (when Arthur Villettes was left in charge). His son and heir was born in Turin on 7 October 1732.  Lady Essex, 'extreamly wellbred & good-humour'd', with 'an excellent taste for everything that is called here Virtu',9 commissioned four pictures from Canaletto. On 18 September 1734 Joseph Smith wrote to Lord Essex from Venice explaining how 'by the force of a Constant reminding Canal of his Engagement to serve Lady Essex' he had made him 'sett aside some other works' and concentrate 'all his skill to finish the four pieces', which had now 'gone by a ship sail'd this week for London'.10 Lady Essex had previously commissioned two other paintings in Venice (artist unknown; cost, unframed, £23-16-8) which Smith announced as completed on 22 August 1733.11 She was in Venice in May 1733, setting out for Bologna where she proposed to see 'a very fine Opera'; she 'had nobody with her but Mr [the Hon. Thomas] Villiers & 6 or 7 servants'.9 Lady Grisell Baillie accompanied her to the opera at the Palazzo Albergati on 15 May.12 She visited Florence in February 1734,13 and on 25 December 1734, when her husband was in England, she set out for Milan, Florence, Rome and Naples, escorted by Lord Euston and his tutor (Walter Chetwynd).14 She was in Florence for three weeks in January 173515 and in Lucca on 15 February when, accompanied by Chetwynd, she attended a grand reception.16 She was, presumably, the 'Madama Es Es' staying in Rome at Easter 1735.17 Lord Essex left Turin on 31 July 1736. In the Essex sale (31 Jan.ff. 1777) there were pictures by Solimena, Van Wittel, Trevisani and Panini which were probably acquired in Italy.
The 4th Earl of Essex was born in Turin and was nearly four when he returned with his parents to England in 1736. His grand tour was undertaken between 1750 and 1754. From Tours on 15 July 1752 he told his sister Lady Anne Capel that he was 'Convinced that the Tour that is proposed for me is both for my pleasure and my improvement'.1 He arrived alone in Venice in mid-December 1752, having quarrelled with his tutor in Frankfurt. He was learning Italian, he told Andrew Mitchell, and had an excellent master who came twice a day.2 The Carnival was marred by the weather, but before it was over he was joined by the 10th Earl of Pembroke (with whom he had already been in Vienna). On 7 March 1753 he told his sister Lady Mary Capel, that he was 'heartily tired of Venice', apart from a recent visit to the opera when the theatre was hung with 'looking Glasses in a very magnificent Manner for the Prince of Anspach', but within a week he would set out with Lord Pembroke for Rome, via Padua, Vicenza and Verona; he was going to write to a Mr Freeman in Rome to procure lodgings, 'as I hear they are difficult to be found unless you speak some time before hand'.3 He wrote again from Rome on 14 April. He was then in the midst of a hectic course of antiquities with the 4th Earl of Rochford: 'the mornings I spend extreamly agreably in seeing very fine things and in learning Italian'; he was reading 'The wars in Flanders' with his tutor 'which is a book not very difficult & good Italian'; he had been received by Cardinal Albani, and intended to go on to Naples after Holy Week before returning to Rome 'to finish what is to be seen here'.4 He sat to Batoni in Rome (Clark/Bowron 176; priv. coll.). He is said to have been with Lords Pembroke, Thanet and Bolingbroke watching Richard Wilson draw at Tivoli in 1754.5 In May 1754 he had passed through Florence to Turin where he spent one night6 on his way back to England. He was home by the end of June and he married Frances Hanbury Williams (to whom he had been betrothed at the age of seventeen)7 in August that year.
He arrived in Venice on 27 March1 and sat to Batoni in Rome, the portrait dated 1772 (Clark/Bowron 346; priv. coll.). His future brother-in-law, James Bucknall Grimston, also sat to Batoni that year.

With his tutor Walter Chetwynd, Lord Euston arrived in Turin in November 1734.1 Late in December they set out with the Countess of Essex for Milan, Florence, Lucca and Rome; Euston had returned to Turin in April 1735.2 On 6 August 1735 Chetwynd, with Lord Berkeley and his son and Lord and Lady Bolingbroke, was staying in a house on the Loire, near Amboise;3 with Lord Euston, he was to meet Lord Essex in Genoa later that month.4 They had visited Venice before November, when Euston was taken ill at Turin with small-pox on the eve of his departure for Paris.5 On 31 December Elizeus Burges told Lord Essex that 'everybody speaks so well of [Lord Euston] & Mr Chetwynd, that I am very sorry I was not at Venice when they were here'.6 Euston was recovering in December and was back in London in March 1736.7 Despite Burges's judgment, Euston became a wild and brutal man. After the death of his wife in childbirth, he was reported (in October 1744) to have eloped to Italy with a Lincolnshire heiress, Miss Nevill, 'a celebrated beauty' who came of a very ancient family and had 'eleven thousand pounds for her fortune'; but he did not marry her.8

Soldier and economist, he fell out with the ducal customs officer at Parma and addressed the prime minister Du Tillot, 'je vous plains fort si vous ne savez pas ce qui se passe à deux doigts de votre nez' (F. Razzetti, Aurea Parma, Jan.-Aug. 1970, 53).





A man of a good plain understanding' and a well-intentioned collector, the 9th Earl of Exeter told Horace Walpole on 24 July 1763 that he was 'setting out for France and Italy in about a month, and was to quit Burleigh in about 3 or 4 days, and not to return from abroad [for] two years'.1 He was then nearly forty and a widower, and he appears to have gone to Italy with the express intention of acquiring old master paintings to complement the remarkable collection of Italian paintings already acquired in Italy by the 5th Earl in the late seventeenth century.2 Lord Exeter travelled with the Scottish connoisseur William Patoun, some of whose recollections of their visit appeared in his 'Advice on Travel' (see above, pp.xxxix-lii). They left Turin on 12 October 1763 for Florence 'on their way to Naples', with a Mr Chambers, a Mr French and Mrs Macarthy with her son.3 By the end of December 1763 Exeter was in Naples,4 where in January Garrick described dining with him 'almost every day and night' in the company of Lord Spencer, Lady Orford, Lord Palmerston, the British consul [Isaac Jamineau] and minister [Philip Changuion].5 Exeter sat to Angelica Kauffman, who had just arrived in Naples, the portrait (sold Christie's, 16 Apr. 1982) being seen by John Byng and James Martin on 8 January; he also acquired her portrait of Garrick (Burghley) and he was to buy several of her history pictures in England. He gave two balls in February (8 and 13). By 7 May he was in Rome and he left for Florence on 5 June with Chambers and Patoun.4 Edward Gibbon recorded that Lord Exeter was to leave Florence on 20 June for England.6 In the first week after his return from Italy Exeter suffered an epileptic fit.7  Of the paintings acquired during this visit, the most distinguished was Poussin's Assumption (Washington), which James Martin saw in Rome on 20 September 1764, 'lately purchased for 500 crowns for Lord Exeter from the Count Soderini'. Four days later Martin saw Gavin Hamilton's Hebe feeding Jupiter's Eagle (Burghley) 'which he has lately finished for Lord Exeter', and on 27 September he met Nikolaus Mosmann in the Barberini Palace 'taking a Drawing of the famous Magdalen of Guido for Lord Exeter', and he saw many more of Mosmann's drawings with Thomas Jenkins.5 Mosmann, a pupil of Mengs, was to make copies of paintings (by, for example, Mengs, Maron, Batoni and even Thomas Jenkins) for Lord Exeter for nearly thirty years (many are now in BMPL); Thomas Jenkins in Rome reminded Lord Exeter on 6 July 1772 'its now many years that he [Mosmann] has had the honour of being imployd by You', and after Mosmann's death in 1787 Exeter paid the artist's widow a pension.8 Several of Lord Exeter's paintings at Burghley, including works by d'Oggiono, Guercino and Artemisia Gentileschi, are said to have come from the Barberini Palace.  Four years later, in 1768, Lord Exeter returned to Italy. He was in Florence on 16 October, Horace Mann noting his arrival by the 25th.9 He was in Rome later the same month, Father Thorpe anticipating on 2 October he 'will be here next week'.10 On 9 November 1768 Jenkins in Rome described him to Charles Townley as 'a fixed Dilettante' of whom he felt more certain than of the Duke of Devonshire or Sir Watkin Williams Wynn, who were there at the same time.11 He passed the winter in Naples where he had arrived by 22 November.12 Sir Gregory Turner was dining with him on 29 November,13 and he was still there on 17 January 1769. By 4 March he was in Rome,14 sometimes in the company of the 3rd Earl of Bute and the 10th Earl of Pembroke,15 and he visited Father Thorpe on 15 April.10 He arrived in Venice with Joseph Mandeville on 29 May.16  It was in Venice that Lord Exeter made the outstanding purchases of his second Italian tour, three large Veroneses from the church of S.Jacopo in Murano, and a great Jacopo Bassano Adoration, said to have been acquired from Senator Vitturi 'in his Gondola at night'. At Naples he appears to have commissioned a set of four views by Pietro Fabris (one is dated 1767, another 1770). His experience was less happy at Rome, where he was advised by both Thomas Jenkins and James Byres. Thus the 'Correggio' Virgin and Child from Byres is a sorry picture, while the 'Raphael' which Byres sold him, said by Father Thorpe to have come from 'the chappel or chamber of St Ignatius at the Gesu' and the collection of Cardinal Nidarni,17 is in fact a copy of the Bridgewater Madonna. There is an account dated Rome 16 May 1769 for 'the last seven pictures which remain in the hands of James Byres' (works by Castiglione, Domenichino, Guido Reni and Sassoferrato), and Byres was offering Lord Exeter more pictures and mosaics in 1771 and 1772.18 Thomas Jenkins commissioned three views of Rome from Philipp Hackert dated 1769 (Burghley). In July 1774, after Exeter's return to England, Pope Clement XIV presented him with a Madonna by Castiglione (now attributed to Orazio Gentileschi), allegedly for the respect Lord Exeter had paid him while in Rome; the picture reached Burghley after the Pope had died. Besides pictures, Exeter also acquired antique sculpture, a chimneypiece by Piranesi, and marble table tops,19 and he built up a fine collection of books and prints relating to Italy and the grand tour.
Exshaw trained in Dublin under Francis Bindon who, from his own experience, may have encouraged his student to go to Italy. After his first tour to the Continent, Exshaw returned to Dublin in 1755, when he held a sale at Geminiani's rooms: 'a curious and valuable collection of paintings, statuary and drawings, most of them originals of the best masters ... and others copied from capital pictures during a course of eight years' travel through France, Flanders and Italy, to the latter of which places he proposes to return some time next summer' (Strickland). 'Mr Carlos Exshaw' had passed through Capua on 27 September 1753 with the artist Richard Hayward, either going to or coming from Naples.1  By 1757 Exshaw was back in Paris and by 1759 he was in Rome, where he signed and dated a pencil portrait of a bearded man and etched from the life a model of Carlo Maratti.2 In the following year he was in Amsterdam, where he acquired works from the collection of Count Colloredo. After Exshaw's return to Dublin he held a second sale at Geminiani's rooms on 10 February 1762. Later in 1762 he settled in London and tried unsuccessfully to set up an Academy in Maiden Lane for instruction in drawing 'in the manner of the Caracci'. A further sale took place in Dublin in May 1764 of Italian, Dutch and Flemish pictures.
Eyles was in Rome in March 1705,1 travelling with John Austen. In May, through Christian Cole, Rosalba Carriera sent them her compliments from Venice where she was decorating a box for Eyles, though the commission was unfinished on 16 May; both Eyles and Austen intended returning to Venice.2 On 10 July Eyles was in Padua with William Bates.3
Sir Francis and his family went to Naples for the sake of his health. They were expected in November 1760 and had arrived by the 3rd.1 By August 1761 his villa there had become known as the English Coffee House: according to James Adam 'they always have their party of whist of an evening where one passes the time with great ease and pleasure'.2 In November 1761 Mann wrote that Lady Eyles with her sister [Frances Egerton] and daughter [Mary Eyles-Styles, 1745-1821] were 'already' in Naples.3 On 22 October 1762 James Adam showed his designs for the new Houses of Parliament to Sir Francis and Sir James Gray in the Casa Guarnieri at Rome, Miss Eyles being then particularly complimentary.4 Sir Francis died in Naples on 26 January 1763.5
Born in Rome in 1732, she presumably left with her parents in 1736, see Charles Radclyffe. Sarah Bentham saw her at Pisa in March 1794 (Bentham jnl.MSS, 23 Mar. 1794). The Mr and Mrs Eyre mentioned by Father Thorpe in Rome in December 1789, see below, may also have been Lady Mary and her husband Francis Eyre.


On 28 March 1711 John Arundell Bellings was visited in Rome by a number of people, including 'Dr James Fagan, gentleman to Cardinal Caprara and agent for the clergy of Ireland'.1 He was possibly the 'Sigre Conte Faivan[?]' living at the 'Seguita Strada Paolina verso li Greci mo destra 15' in 1712.2 Fagan's tombstone in the crypt of St Isidore's church in Rome gives his age in 1713 as 65, and describes him as 'Presbuter Hibernus pius et eruditus doctor Complutensis [i.e. of Alcala de Henarez] agens cleri Hibrniae [sic] Romae', adding that he was offered the see of Meath by the Pope, but refused it.3 The offer was made in 1707.4  From Naples the 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury sought Fagan's advice as to 'what good Books or Prints there are come out of Late years (since Pietro de Bellori's time) relating to the antient Statues, Medalls or Basso relievo of the antients',5 and it was Fagan who recommended Henry Trench when Shaftesbury was seeking an artist to produce drawings for his Characteristicks.6
Robert Fagan's first visit to Italy was brief. 'We have got two new Students, Grignion & Fagan over' wrote James Irvine from Rome on 22 December 1781, but on 14 June 1782 the same writer reported that Fagan had been obliged to return to England.1  In 1784 Fagan returned to Italy where he was to spend the rest of his eventful and somewhat dissolute life, dividing his activities between painting, dealing, archaeology and ultimately diplomacy. He arrived in Italy from Paris early in February2 and by 6 March 1784 he was living in the Casa di Trinità dei Monti at Rome with a Mr Robinson.3 He was to remain based in Rome; in 1790 he was listed as a history painter at the 'Strada del Babuino over the coach maker' and in 1793 as a portrait painter at the Palazzo del Babuino. In April 1794, with the other British artists in Rome, he signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus (see Rome Lists). During his early years in Rome, Fagan was supported by an anonymous 'Trustee' who allowed him £100 a year; Irvine told Cumberland of this, adding that Fagan would not be able to support himself if he continued his existing life-style and kept a 'showy' horse.4 The Trustee may have been Edward Poore of Salisbury who, six years later on 12 February 1790, wrote: 'I am very well pleased with your account of Fagan and with his account of himself; I directly answered his draft upon Herries [banker] ... I have no doubt he will do very well in life, being an active, lively man, formed for business and for the world: I wish tho' you wd. persuade him to finish all he has undertaken for me of the Domenichino's before he goes to Titian, which tho' very useful for his study of colours is not equally agreeable to my taste in design ... Fagan's brains are in the right place: he is disposed to live in this world ... and therefore  ... will I dare say come over to England and get rich by the trade of painting, instead of starring in visionary refinement upon the profession of it'.5 Fagan stayed on in Italy, twice marrying young Italian women. At a time when Flaxman was describing him as having been 'very extravagant & embarrased [in] his circumstances',6 Fagan married on 12 April 1790 Anna Maria Aloisia Rosa Ferri, the seventeen-year-old daughter of Pietro Ferri, an employee of Cardinal Rezzonico. The couple settled in the Via Babuino7 and their daughter Estina was born on 15 November 1792. According to Lady Knight, Fagan again changed his religion to marry her ('the daughter of C. Ritson's valet de chambre'); an Irish Catholic, he had already changed his faith in England. Lady Knight also recounted how Fagan refused to show her and her daughter his pictures since 'we were enemies of the Revolution' and, not surprisingly, characterised him as 'a very worthless fellow'.8 Fagan's first wife died on 25 August 1800 and within six weeks he had married Maria Ludovica Francesca Geltrude Flanjani, who appears half-draped in his self-portrait of c.1803 (priv. coll., Ireland). They settled in the Palazzo Spada on the Corso,7 and by 20 March, 1803 they were living in the Piazza Colonna.9 Their first child, Emilia, was born c.1806 and a second, George, some time after 1812.10 Fagan produced a considerable number of portraits in the neoclassical style for grand tourists, his sitters including Lady Augusta Murray, Lady Clifford, George Wright, Sophia Cotton (later Lady Mainwaring), Lady Webster, and Sir Corbet Corbet and his wife. He also executed seventeen painted trompe l'oeil grisailles after the antique which were bought by the 2nd Lord Berwick for Attingham. Besides practising as a painter, Fagan set up as a dealer in antiquities and pictures, his patrons including the 4th Earl of Bristol. He profited considerably from the traffic in major works of art sold by Italian families during the French occupation of Rome, and in 1798-9, with Charles Grignion, he succeeded in smuggling the Altieri Claudes out of Italy.10 A good deal of Fagan's personal collection, valued at £3,000, became impounded during this period. In May 1800 he exported fifty-five pictures for George Cumberland and mentioned buying other 'capital pictures' from Roman palazzi.10 He had already applied for a licence on 15 March 1800 to ship forty-four paintings and on 25 July 1800 six cases of works of art, mostly of sculpture, which were destined for Prince Augustus and Thomas Hope. (Fagan was to make further applications to export works of art between September 1806 and October 1807).  But Fagan's greatest achievements in Italy were made as an archaeologist,11 a field in which he enjoyed the particular favour of Prince Augustus. He worked at Gabii (1792) with Gavin Hamilton, at Campo Iemini (1794-6) with Prince Augustus and Sir Corbet Corbet; and at Ostia, where he discovered the first mithraeum c.1794, Tor Boaccina (1797), Tyndaris (1808) and Selinunte in Sicily (1809-10).12 A colossal mask of Neptune excavated at Hadrian's Villa, which was in the estate of Fagan, was sold to the Vatican in 1817. Fagan's later years in Sicily and Italy fall outside the scope of this Dictionary, but he was appointed consul general for Sicily and Malta in 1809 and resided at Palermo.13 In that year he painted Lady Acton and her children, which he signed 'Painted by Robert Fagan His Britannic Majesty's Consul Governor for Sicily 1809'. He became on good terms with Queen Maria Carolina of Naples, but by 1814 he was losing favour with the British government due, at least in part, to his continuing activities as a dealer and to his increasing financial difficulties. In 1815 he made a brief visit to London; by January 1816 he had returned to Rome, where, on 26 August he took his own life.


Falkland, a Jacobite peer, came to Rome with his governor, 'the Scotch capt. Ogilby' [Captain James Ogilvie], in October 1723; he was then in poor health and they intended going to Naples.1 The following year his son Lucius Charles Cary joined him in Naples.2 Falkland was banished from Naples 'for having made love too openly to a Lady of Quality' and in March 1725 he returned to Rome, where he kept company with the Jacobite Lord Nithsdale.3
Little is known of Fane's first visit to Italy; he had been in France in 1727, and on 20 January 1730 he had left Venice.1 In March 1734 he was appointed British minister to Tuscany, in succession to Francis Colman. After a short tour of Switzerland,2 he arrived in Florence on 3 October 1734.3 His brief was to watch over the Pretender, and to this end he visited Rome in March 1735 for talks with Cardinal Cienfuegos.4 Fane warned against Stosch, but the government in turn found Fane ineffectual5 and in 1737 sent him an assistant (later his successor), Horace Mann. Fane was apparently highly-strung; he was said to have spent six weeks in bed after the Duke of Newcastle 'in one of his letters, forgot to sign himself 'your very humble servant' as usual, and only put 'your humble servant'.6 Fane's mother, Lady Mary Fane (d. 1762, sister of the 1st Earl of Stanhope) and his sister Dorothy (1717-97, who m. the 4th Earl of Sandwich in 1741) came to visit him in June 1736, Dorothy staying on in June 1737.7 In December 1736 Lady Denbigh's correspondent, W.B. (William Bristow), found the minister's house 'tout à fait aimable'; Fane 's'est fait generalement aimé, et ce qui est plus rare dans un homme si jeune, il s'est fait generalement estimé'.8 Fane left on leave in April 1738, and did not return, subsequently recouping expenses out of his successor's salary.9 Horace Walpole described Fane as one of the lovers of the Florentine Madame Suares.10

Simon Fanshawe, his wife and son and Miss Snelling, the 'tribu des Fanshawe', considered by Mme du Deffand as 'pas faits pour avoir de grands succès nulle part',1 were in Italy in 1772, when Patrick Home met them.2 They were passing through Capua on 5 October,3 going to or coming from Naples.
Sir William Farington made a rapid four-month tour of Italy in 1765, when he was thirty five. His Italian journal (Farington jnl.MSS) reflects a well-disposed but placid traveller. At Turin he obtained an introduction from Louis Dutens to Horace Mann in Florence1 and after two false starts from Genoa by boat he travelled towards Rome by chaise. At Florence he spent two nights at Hadfield's, making the acquaintance of Thomas Giffard and the Abbé Hook, both of whom he later met in Rome and Naples. In Rome on 12 April he called on 'Mr Jenkins the Painters, saw some fine Pictures, & Statues, from thence to the Antiquarians Shop, bought several things, from thence to Perenises [Piranesi's], bought several of His Prints'. He admired the Villa Albani, whose elegance was 'not to be describ'd, the Doors finely ornamented with Landskips, the marble Floors, the Mosaic Floors, Mosaick & inlaid Pannels, in the Marble Gallery, the Chinese Room, the Flys, & Butterfly, on the Glass, the Statues, Vauses, Bass-Releivos, & Antique Marbles, are most amazing' (16 Apr.). In Naples Farington watched a Neapolitan girl take the veil, 'dress'd in Purple Silk, Brocaded with Gold, Silver, & Coulours, a Crown of Diamonds and Rubies' (24 Apr.), he climbed Vesuvius (29 Apr.) and thought the King 'a plain looking Youth, about 16, something like the Duke of York' (27 Apr.). On his return journey he was introduced with James Boswell2 to the Pope on 13 May ('the Old Man is very chearful'). He bought 'some things' from the sculptor Francis Harwood in Florence (30 May), and heard Nardini play at Thomas Earle's in Leghorn (5 Jun.). He was back at Shaw Hall by 23 July, 'greatly satisfied with the agreeable Tour we had made'. His servant's diary3 is briefer-their passage over Mont Cenis 'so od not to be discribd'; in Florence he allowed himself 'a black Satin wastcote and strol'd about the Town'.



On a visit to the Protestant cemetery at Rome in April 1793 Sir William Forbes was shown 'the turf which covered the remains of poor Sandie Farquarson, my Ward, son of my worthy friend, Mr Farquharson of Haughton, who falling into bad health had gone to sea by Civitavecchia, & thence to Rome where his eldest brother [Francis Farquharson, d. unm. 1808] then was, and where he soon after died, the year before we went abroad [i.e., 1791]'.1 He was probably the 'Farcarhonson' staying in Venice between 18 March and 21 May 1791.2






There are several disjointed references to a (variously spelled) Faulkner in Florence in 1779-80. In the spring of 1779 'Falkenor' and Henry Swinburne were Horace Mann's table guests,1 and in November 'Faukiner' was much with Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke).2 In December 'Faukner's' 'good Humour' failed to lift John Coxe Hippisley's spirits,3 and a Mr 'Faulkner' 'was very kind' to Michael Kelly in Florence 1780/81, and 'feasted the Florentines sumptuously'.4
Fauquier and the 2nd Earl Stanhope spent much of January 1733 in Milan 'to hear the first rehearsals of the second Opera' on the 20th.1 They went on to Venice and set out for Rome together in March.2 A year later, on 21 July 1734, Fauquier arrived in Florence from Rome;3 he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno on 9 January 1735.4 Among the many pictures Fauquier owned was the 'Sketch of a Landscape by Nicholo Poussin' which he bought from Cardinal Ottoboni, conceivably in Rome,5 although most of his purchases appear to date from after his visit to Italy. Stosch recorded the arrival in Rome of a 'Fauquier' with his wife and family in November 1733, evidently not William (and conceivably an error for Martin Folkes and his family).6



He was probably the Mr Fawkener who arrived in Florence in October 1768.1  In January 1774, on their way to Italy, William Augustus Fawkener and his brother Everard stopped at Ferney to visit Voltaire, who had been a close friend of their father's. He greeted them warmly; 'Mon Dieu! que je me trouve heureux de me voir entre deux Falkeners!'2. Lady Mary Coke noticed their passage through Turin to Milan, and frowned on their alleged visit to the Duke of Cumberland,3 after whose predecessor ('Butcher' Cumberland) William had been named. At Naples in April the brothers were shown the regiment of Liparotes by the King of Sicily.4 In August/ September Fawkener was planning to return to Paris, where Madame du Deffand considered him 'parfaitment aimable, sans nul travers, sans nul inconvenient'.5  The 'Forcherr' in Florence on 26 February 1774 was possibly one of the brothers.6 The Italian correspondence of Ozias Humphry refers in 1775 to 'a young man' who had been making copies for Mr Fawkener (undated draft letter). Humphry had painted both Mrs Bouverie's brothers, 'Mr Fawkener and Mr Everard Fawkener' and had sent them to England 'unfinished' (draft letter of 1775); Mrs Bouverie acknowledged them on 18 December 1775, saying she was well pleased.7  William was reported to be in Florence with the 8th Duke of Hamilton on 1 June 1776,6 and may be identified therefore as the 'Fawkener' who arrived in Rome in November 1775 and the 'Fawkner' playing cards with the Duke of Hamilton, and others in Rome in December.8 By the end of June 1776 he was at Calais, 'returning from Italy to London'.9 On 1 May 1787 Fawkener (then on a special diplomatic mission in Lisbon) was appointed envoy extraordinary to the Tuscan Court in succession to Horace Mann, but there is no evidence that he then came to Florence.10
He arrived back in Falmouth from Italy at the same time as the Altieri Claudes-exported from Italy by Robert Fagan and Fazakerly's friend, Charles Grignion (Gordon, Personal Reminiscences, 2:15).
Feake travelled with W. Mace and they had arrived in Venice by 22 May 1733.1 Martin Folkes, whom they often met in Venice, called them 'very good people', and he thought Mace 'the most conversable man I have met abroad'.2 They passed through Padua3 on their way to Rome, where Folkes renewed their acquaintance in November.4



Fellowes was at Rome at the same time as Dr Conyers Middleton, 'whom he often accompanied in viewing the curiosities of that city and the country surrounding it'.1 On 22 April 1724 Fellowes, with Conyers Middleton and Colonel John Folliott, left Rome to return to England;2 they were heading for Venice3 and were in Padua on 13 May.4

In 1792-3 Miss Fellows (or Fellowes) attended the Duchess of Ancaster at Naples1 where, 'by the means of a little white and a good deal of red, she was thought handsome, and made a sort of sensation'; she was in turn escorted by the Duchess's 'young prigg' of a physician, Edward Ash.2 The party stayed in Venice3 on their way to Switzerland. See Mary, Duchess of Ancaster.



Ferguson had been a friend of the Adam family, and Robert Adam had hoped he would join him in Italy in 1755, but he appears to have reached Italy late in 1757.1 He may have been the Mr Ferguson who met the architect Robert Mylne in Rome in December 1758 and travelled with him to Florence in April 1759.2 A 'Monsu Feoighison' was listed in Rome with a 'Monsu Res Inglese'[?] on the Strada Felice at Easter 1759.3  Ferguson travelled again at the age of seventy, in 1793. He was then considering a second edition of his History of the Progress and Termination of the Roman Republic [1782]. He was in Venice on 19 October 1793 when he wrote to his wife describing the 'Streets & lanes paved with Water with Boats for Coaches & Chariots' and marvelling at the 'numberless Palaces all of Marble & loaded with ornament'.4 An Italian translation of his history was being published in Venice [1793-4], though Ferguson did not mention it in his letters. He went to Padua and Florence, where he was made a member of the Accademia del Disegno; he was elected to the Etruscan Society of Antiquaries in Cortona and, as Megaste Leonteo, to the Accademia degli Arcadi in Rome. Ferguson met in Rome the young antiquary Patrick Moir who had received a letter from his uncle James Byres warning him that Ferguson was a vegetarian 'and will want an apartment in a quiet decent house'.5 Only two of his letters from Italy survive, but it is evident he went on from Rome to Naples.4
Son to a gentleman of large fortune in Scotland', Robert Ferguson carried an introduction from Sir R. Murray (dated 3 April 1795) to William Hamilton in Naples.1 'A Scotchman named Fergusson' was in Florence with the daughter of Countess Shall, 'a Saxon Lady', in April 1796.2 He was doubtless the 'Roberto Fergason Inglese' travelling from Lausanne who stayed at Verona in December 1795 and the 'Milord Turgusson Inglese' who arrived in Venice on 30 January 1796.3 He was also probably the Ferguson who, with Lord Daer, applied for a passport to leave Rome for Naples in 17964 and possibly the Ferguson who came to Verona from Venice on 19 February 1797.5

He had set out on the grand tour in April 1756 with George Dempster, who was suddenly called home after they had spent six months based in Brussels. Fergusson went on through Germany and reached Turin on 10 February 1757.1 Dempster sent letters to him at Rome in August, Naples in October and Florence in November. He sat to Batoni in Rome (priv. coll.; Clark/Bowron 204), and visited Siena and Pisa. The Seven Years War prevented his return through France ('you are in some measure a prisoner in Italy', Dempster suggested), and he returned through Germany, landing at Harwich on 20 March 1758. He may also have been the 'Ferguson' who carried a letter from Lady Mary Wortley Montagu to Lady Bute (sometime before May 1758), and the 'Ferguson' whom she later described as 'the prettiest Man I have seen since I left England'.2

Fermor travelled with his Irish tutor, Daniel Doran. They attended Sir Lambert Blackwell's leave taking in Florence in February 1705,1 and the Duke of Shrewsbury saw 'Mr Farmer' in Rome in March and Venice in May.2 They were in Padua in May.3
From 1751 (the year of his marriage to a young Roman woman) to 1753 Fermor was living in the Strada Gregoriana.1 Of their children Henry (c.1756-1825) and James (c.1757-1833) entered the Church at Rome and two of their daughters became nuns at Perugia.2 In October 1756 Robert Adam danced away most of one afternoon with 'Mrs Farmer', probably Mrs Fermor, at Dr James Irwin's house.3 Robert Fermor was a widower by August 1788 ('Capt Fermour since the loss of his Lady appears to be younger than 68'4); he was 'infirm' in June 17905 and suffered a sore leg the following year, but he never lost his 'martial figure & features'.6 He was possibly the Mr Fermor who served the Duke of York, replacing the deceased Cav. Gigli in February 1765, and who was described by Andrew Lumisden in October that year as suffering from an ear complaint.7
William Fermor borrowed £20 from Horace Mann at Leghorn 'to buy absolute necessaries on his being appointed captain of a ship, and without which he would have been obliged to eat with the sailors'.1 Mann's loan (which offended Lady Pomfret) was charged to Lord Pomfret.2 Fermor kept travel diaries while abroad in 1736-44 (priv. coll.; Yale Univ. microfilm).
Mr Farmer,' wrote Horace Walpole, 'a Roman Catholic, son of lady Brown, has his own portrait painted both by Mencks and Pompieo'.1 The Mengs (Ashmolean Museum) is dated May 1757, and the Batoni 1758 (Museum of Fine Arts, Houston; Clark/Bowron 271). Through the Abbé Grant's recommendation, Fermor became Robert Mylne's pupil in Rome in the spring of 17582 (and he subsequently employed the architect to build Tusmore House 1766-70). Fermor was the only 'English Person of Fortune' to visit Jonathan Skelton, an alleged Jacobite, in Rome; on 28 June 1758 he was on his way home.3 He was probably the Mr Fermor whom Charles Wiseman remembered in 1763 as having been in Rome with Mr Booth [Charles Booth?].4




A widow, Lady Ferrers, who travels with the Duke [of Cumberland], broke her knee-pan at Naples, and continues quite lame' (Wal.Corr., 25:645, 20 May 1786).
Lady Ferrers arrived in Paris in 1729, newly widowed, and took for her lover Charles Wyndham's travelling tutor Campbell.1 On the grounds that Wyndham 'understood the language enough to travel without him which my Lady Ferrers did not',2 Campbell abandoned his charge and proceeded to Venice,3 Rome and Naples4 with Lady Fermor. By 1730 they had been joined by Lady Ferrers's gouty brother, Sir Richard Levinge. Lady Ferrers eventually left Rome on 20 April, returning to England: 'She seems to be very attached to the King, although her manner of conversing familiarly with Lady Newburg, [Anne] Darcy, Lady Anne Maxwell and other Jacobite ladies ... would lead one to believe the contrary'; her brother stayed in Rome for the summer,5 and went to Naples in July.6  A pair of Rosalba Carriera portraits of c.1729-30 (priv. coll.) are said to be of Lord and Lady Ferrers, but the identities remain uncertain.7
Good natured, formal, effeminate, and obliging, without violent Passions or Ambition, a negative character who will Rather be acted upon than act for himself',1 Sir Harry (as Henry was known) was in Italy in 1776 accompanied by his uncle, the Rev. Utrick Fetherstonhaugh. In Rome and Naples he became the 'inseparable companion' of the 8th Duke of Hamilton, to the dismay of Hamilton's tutor Dr John Moore, who also thought Sir Harry was 'very fond of Miss [Eliza] Gore, sister to Lady Cowper' and as 'Sir H. is not a man to control any Inclination that he can gratify, I dare say he will yield to his present penchant'-but nothing further transpired.  Sir Harry sat to Batoni in Rome (Uppark; Clark/Bowron 339), where Hamilton left him in May 1776, but they planned to meet in Florence on 1 June. On 13 June Sir Harry in Florence was asking Ozias Humphry to obtain discreetly a portrait of the Countess of Albany; Humphry painted her miniature portrait himself, but without mentioning Sir Harry's name.2 Sir Harry planned to visit Venice. His expense account (at Uppark) reveals that he took £200 with him to Italy in cash; he spent £600 in Rome and £500 in Florence; in Venice and on 'a second visit' to Rome (presumably that made in May, after he had been to Naples) he was more economical, spending £200 in each place.
Sir Matthew travelled with his wife Sarah, and was occasionally joined by a number of relatives-his wife's brother Benjamin Lethieullier and her half-brother Lascelles Raymond Iremonger, and his own brother, Utrick Fetherstonhaugh with his future wife Katherine Durnford, see Iremonger. Sir Matthew ('another sick husband') first visited Horace Mann in Florence on 9 October 1750.1 In January 1751 the party was in Rome, where Lady Fetherstonhaugh held conversazioni for 'all ye English of our side [of] ye Question'.2 All the party sat to Batoni (Sir Matthew, his wife and Iremonger sitting twice), resulting in a unique set of nine portraits, with two additional subject pieces by Batoni, Meekness and Purity of Heart (Clark/Bowron 154-63, 167-8). Sir Matthew (and Iremonger) also appeared in Reynolds's Parody of the School of Athens (NGI) painted in Rome in 1751.3 In April 1751 he commissioned four paintings from Vernet, and two more the following year (through Lethieullier).4 From Rome the party went to Naples, where Sir Matthew evidently acquired a set of five Neapolitan views by Tomaso Ruiz. Lady Fetherstonhaugh recorded a visit to Herculaneum in February. By July 1751 the party was in Venice,5 where Sir Matthew met Joseph Smith who was to send him between 1753 and 1755 tables, china and pictures,6 including eight 'Canalettos' (versions of paintings owned by Smith) and paintings by Zuccarelli, Orizzonte and a set of six Giordanos.  On his return home Sir Matthew told Horace Mann that he had 'acquired Reputation' by his purchases in Italy and 'those Pictures particularly I bought at Naples are much esteem'd'; the 'Bianco Nero tables, [though] still in there [sic] Cases ... are admir'd as the finest things of their kind in England'.7 In the same letter he asked Mann to 'inquire of the Monk [presumably Belloni] whether he has not done the two tables I bespoke of him ... they were inlaid tables, of wch kind Mr [Joseph] Leeson had one done'. Sir Matthew's purchases remain for the most part at Uppark.
He was not married at the time of his first grand tour with his brother. In [October?] 1753 Sir Matthew told Horace Mann that 'My bror. that was abroad with me has married Miss Durnford (un marriage D'Amour) I hope they will be happy, tho' Prudence was a little neglected'.1 Katherine was probably Mann's 'pretty Miss -, I really forget her name', who had accompanied Lady Fetherstonhaugh in Florence in 1750.2 The Rev. Fetherstonhaugh was guardian to his nephew, Sir Henry, during his grand tour in 1775-6.


Roberto French, Roberto Butler, Pedro Holmes, Patricio Ferral' were in Capua on 23/4 January 1754, either coming from or going to Naples.1 In Rome at Easter 1754 a 'Domco Roberto French 54 Cav. Ingl. Catol.' and his nephew 'Franco French 24' were living in the Casa Guarnieri.2 Robert ffrench sat to Batoni in Rome (priv. coll.; Clark/Bowron 181); the portrait, dated 1754, shows a young man who could have been twenty-four.
Loyal to the King', Field was in Rome in March 1729 with Ingleby, Matthew Wise and William Freeman and his brother;1 in April they set out for Naples,2 and on 15 May they left Rome for Venice.3


A youth of much modesty, virtue and sweetness of temper' (CP), and one particularly interested in opera, he travelled with his tutor Anthony Twyman.1 He was in Genoa in 1709 where he saw Orlandini's L'odio e l'amore, one of several librettos he bought. In Florence that autumn he saw and bought the libretto of Nicolo Fago's Radamisto. In February 1710 Finch and his cousin Lord Hatton arrived in Venice to see 'the last of the Carnivall'2 and his accounts record one visit to the opera. The cousins were in Padua on 25 March.3 From May to September Finch stayed in Rome, keeping two musicians as part of his household. In October Finch was 'Nobly presented by the Grand Duke, & served with his Coaches' in Florence.4 In the spring of 1711 he returned to Genoa as guest of the British envoy, William Chetwynd, and attended several operas. Finch may not have returned to England until 1712; he later became a director of the Royal Academy of Music.
Edward Finch arrived in Naples 'designing to stay a few months' and stayed two and a half years.1 Richard Rawlinson knew Finch at Naples in September 1721,2 and noted his arrival in Rome on 4 February 1723, together with Robert Walpole and a Captain H. Thomas; Finch went to lodge at 'Mr Hyde's near Monte Cavallo'.3 Finch left for Florence in April4 and was in Padua in May.5 He went to Hanover in search of preferment6 and reported that in London Carteret and Townshend were promising to 'cook [him] up some secretary place in Italy',7 but in the event Finch's first mission was as minister to Ratisbon.8


After leaving Oxford and succeeding his father in 1770, Findlater lived largely on the Continent, where he cut a modest figure. Horace Walpole was 'woebegone' to encounter him in Paris in 1771, 'starched as an old-fashioned plaited neckcloth',1 and the Bishop of Derry found him 'a strange animal'.2 Findlater's letters to his mother describe his wanderings in Italy in 1771-3 (Findlater letters MSS; dates cited in brackets) and there are additional letters to his Scottish agent John Ross.3  Findlater travelled initially with the antiquary Colin Morison (his father's protege) who, he said, would stay with him until November 1771 for a fee of £600 to make up for his absence from Rome (6 Aug. 1771). Findlater came to Turin from Lyons in September 1771 and proceeded via Milan, Parma and Modena to Bologna where he arrived on 29 September. He spent some six weeks in Florence before reaching Rome on 10 November. In Rome he wrote of plans to get 'Mr [Gavin] Hamilton' to paint a companion to 'the Picture of the Vestal Virgin at Cullen', and of his own progress ('I speak Italian tolerably and find great pleasure in applying myself to it'; to Ross, 24 Nov. 1771). In December he went to Naples, passing through Capua on 2 December.4 Naples he found 'dirty & mean both as to Streets & Buildings, but the Situation & Climate most charming'; he had become 'exceedingly intimate' with 'a sett of very amiable English', the Italians were 'the most miserable Creatures imaginable'; 'to sum up my Travels I know of no Town worth living in but Paris, or going to see but Rome' (to Ross, 27 Dec. 1771).  He was back in Rome in February 1772 when Gavin Hamilton was painting a Muse for Cullen (Old Cullen in 1975). But again Findlater wrote of his disappointment with the Italian people: though he liked 'the contry of Italy very much, even tho it fall much short of my Idea of it', he hated 'the Italians in general & particularly at Rome' but, as at Naples, there were 'some very agreeable English' who, with Cardinal de Bernis, made amends (12 May 1772). On 23 May he arrived back in Naples with Norton Nicholls ('Milord Conte de Findlater con Mr Nicolls' were listed at Capua on 13 May,4 though Findlater's letters suggest he was still in Rome on the 18th). Nicholls was a parson who found Findlater's style hard to match; he borrowed 10 guineas from his Lordship and told his mother of the 'great inconvenience of living with a Lord' because he suffered 'for the impositions he undergoes'.5 Findlater returned to Rome on 21 July, but just before he left Naples he told Ross that he had tried to get for him 'a Cameo or two' in Rome, 'but there are so many purchasers it is very difficult to meet with good ones'; he had, however, spoken with Morison and Byres, the latter 'a most surprising Man for Taste Worth Modesty & Knowledge' (4 Jul. 1772). He was in Florence early in August and on 26 September he arrived in Genoa by felucca (presumably from Leghorn). In October he visited Milan and Venice,6 again with Nicholls (who borrowed a further £30).7  By the end of November he was back in Rome, where there were 'English in abundance'. He stayed until mid-January 1773 and then went to Naples where he arrived on 28 January (he was listed at Capua on both 6 and 21 January4 though he wrote from Rome on the 15th). He stayed until the end of March when he returned to Rome with William Preston, 'a worthy sensible man', as his travelling companion. They planned to return to England together and were reported in Florence on 10 April.8 Findlater's letters show he then travelled north through Bologna, Milan and Turin, to reach Geneva on 26 May 1773. Two and a half years later he wrote his last grand tour letter from The Hague.
He arrived in Naples in September 1721 with Captain Legh, and they went to Rome in November.1 Fingall, a Catholic, was still in Rome the following spring,2 and Legh was there in April 1723.3

Mr F' was in Leghorn on 19 September 1790, and the following day he accompanied Francis Burdett and the Gibbes family from Leghorn to Pisa (Gibbes jnl.MSS).
A young engraver, commended by Robert Adam, he brought back from Rome some intaglios for Lady Spencer (Gavin Hamilton to Ldy. Spencer, Rome, 12 May 1770; BL, Althorp MSS, F117).


On 18 April he returned to Naples from Rome, after spending 'several months' in both cities (SP 85/16, f.245).


Although he had assumed the name of Howard, Fisher was imprisoned in the fortress at Florence in January 1730, 'suspected to be the Fisher that committed the barbarous murther upon the body of his friend Mr Derby in the Temple at London in April 1727'.1 He was described as about twenty years old; three months later, on instructions from England he was released in March as being one 'Hopeful Whitehead',2 and he then lived four years in Leghorn as 'John Warner', until he was discovered. He took refuge in the church of S.Giovanni,3 and then escaped to Rome with £500 stolen from his master 'Lloyd'.4 In Rome he 'sat himself down safe under the Protection of the Church',5 married a Mrs Cook,6 and made a fortune by 'carrying on Trade to a great extent for a number of years', and generally avoiding his fellow countrymen.5 Henry Fisher received a payment from the 10th Earl of Huntingdon in 1775,7 and he appears to have been the 4th Earl of Bristol's banker in Rome in the 1770s and 1780s.8 In 1778 Thomas Jones was much alarmed at dealing with the 'old shrivel'd assisin - ... I could not help conceiving a Dagger lay concealed in every wrinkle'.5
"John Fisher went to Italy after spending five years as precentor to Prince Edward. He travelled 'all through Italy and Switzerland with a pencil in his hand, taking landscapes in a most pleasing manner'.1 One of his drawings (Part of the Aqueduct near Santa Croce) is dated Rome, January 1786.2 In Italy Mrs Piozzi described him as 'a charming creature, generally known in society as ""the King's Fisher""' (DNB). On 14 July 1786 he was recalled from Naples to take up a canonry at Windsor."
It is said that 'at the age of eighteen' Fitzgerald 'went to the Court of Louis XV as the guest of the Comte d'Artois, and travelled also in Italy'.1 Following his marriage to Jane, sister of Tom Conolly of Castletown in 1770, when his father had settled £1,000 a year of his estate rentals on him, Fitzgerald returned to the Continent.2 'After nearly three years spent mostly abroad in Rome and Florence and Brussels, besides Paris, the Fitzgeralds returned to their house in Merrion Square, Dublin, heavily in debt and weary of dissipation'.3
Lord Henry Fitzgerald spent most of 1794 abroad with his wife who was an amateur artist and 'a most accomplished young person'. In October 1793 they were said to be coming to Berne to visit their kinsman Lord Robert Fitzgerald, the British representative, while on their way to Naples.1 They were in north Italy early in 1794 and Lady Webster had met them in Verona apparently in December 1793, recording that Lady Fitzgerald there gave birth to a child.2 Later in Naples Lady Fitzgerald drew Lady Templetown's three daughters.3 They were again in Berne in June 1794,4 and five months later they were in Rome, where Fitzgerald was presented to the Pope on 28 November.5  Lord Henry may also have been the 'Milord Fiztgerland Inglese' who arrived in Bergamo from Milan on 9 May 1796 with the diplomat Francis Drake and Francis Hill.6
Robert Fitzgerald was in Florence in November 17641 and the following month at Rome, where he determined to travel with Thomas Skipwith, John Wilbraham and Dr Turnbull to the Near East.2 'Monsieur Fitzgerald' was in Capua on 1 January 1765 on his way to Naples,3 whence, presumably, the travellers sailed. Fitzgerald sat to Maron in Rome, the portrait dated 1765 (priv. coll.), and on 8 April 1765 (when Fitzgerlad was apparently still in the Near East) James Byres in Rome addressed a letter to him in Venice telling him the head in the portrait 'was not near finished ... so that it must await your return [from the East]'; he also said that 'the three volumes of Herculaneum' and 'the Antiquities of Albano (which Piranesi has published since you left..)' were about to be shipped from Leghorn.4

Colonel Fitzgerald, 'Mrs Grattan's brother' was in Naples in the spring of 1786.1 He was probably the Mr Fitzgerald noticed in Rome during the winter of 1785-6.2
Described by Stosch as 'Le chevalier Ghirardin, chevalier de Malte and Captain of an Irish Regiment in the service of France,' he was in Rome in 1725 and again in June 1726, when he was received by the Pretender.1 He had been in Milan with General [Ulysses] Browne and Captain Hurly in February 1725.2 In October 1728 Stosch reported that 'Le Chevalier Giraldin/Fitz Girald' had returned to Bologna to see the Pretender.3
Fitzherbert was elected a Worts travelling scholar (see Thomas Kerrich). None of his statutory letters survive, but he wrote to the Marquess of Granby (later 4th Duke of Rutland) from Naples on 4 February 1776 (HMC Rutland, 3:4).

For William Fitzherbert's first visit to Italy, his portraits by Batoni and Patch and his commissions from Guardi, see William, 5th Duke of Devonshire. He returned to Italy in 1783-4 with his wife. He was probably the 'Milord Ficerbert' who arrived in Rome on 18 January 1783.1 They were in Naples in January and February 1784: Fitzherbert was dining with the 5th Earl of Shaftesbury on 27 January and Parkinson saw him with his wife on 8 February.2 He met them again in Rome on 4 March.2 In Rome Fitzherbert commissioned a portrait of his wife from Angelica Kauffman (Tissington) for which payments were made in March and April.3


Probably also the Jacobite 'Fitzmorris' met in Rome by Lord Quarendon in January 1740 (SP 98/43, f.13; Walton, 7 Feb. 1740).
A brave and gallant young man of a very amorous disposition', he arrived in Leghorn in 1738 as captain of the Eltham.1 He lived 'some time' in Florence in 1739 with Horace Mann2 who presented him to the Grand Duke on 24 January.3 He left Florence on 20 February with his younger brother, see Lord Charles Fitzroy (1718-39).
He travelled in Italy with John Ramsden. On 5 May 1722 they arrived at Padua,1 'but it being late and shutt they were obliged to sleep in a cottage till next morning'. They left for Venice two days later, and in June they were seen at the Opera in Bologna.2 Lord Charles died of smallpox in France on 15 August 1723.3
Lord Charles Fitzroy made the grand tour with Thomas Seward as his tutor. He arrived in Florence on 6 November 1738 from Genoa,1 and in January 1739 he was in Rome.2 In Florence Fitzroy called on Stosch, from whom he bought an intaglio (a Meleager), the poet Tommaso Crudeli accompanying him as he was afraid of being cheated.3 On 20 February 1739, with the 4th Earl of Sandwich and his older brother Augustus, he left Florence for Genoa where they were to embark for Lisbon.4 They returned to Leghorn on 27 June.5 He was afterwards in Genoa, and on 11 August he died in Milan,6 his fatal illness caused, said Sacheverell Stevens, by travelling over the mountains early one morning after having overheated himself dancing all night at an assembly in Florence.7 Horace Walpole later recalled that Seward, believing that Fitzroy was recovering under the attention of Sir John Shadwell, 'whipped up to his chamber and began a complimentary Ode to his physician' but kept it after his pupil's death, 'being too much pleased with it to throw it away'.8
By 17 October 1778 Lord Fitzwilliam and his school friend John Crosdill, the celebrated 'cellist, having passed 'some time' at Genoa, had gone on an excursion to Novi, promising to return.1 They were later in Turin (DNB).  Fitzwilliam returned to Italy in 1783. He was in Florence by 24 October and left on the 30th,2 to arrive at Rome on 1 November.3 On 22 November Charles Parker described him in Rome as 'a sensible & curious man' who intended to visit Sicily and Calabria the following spring.4 Fitzwilliam was still in Rome in March 1784,5 but by 7 May, when he wrote to the 3rd Earl Cowper in Florence, he was in Naples.6 Fitzwilliam and Lord Cowper were then promoting Handel's music in Italy (in Handel's centenary year).7 He may have been the Lord Fitzwilliam listed in Rome and Naples in July 1794.8
He arrived in Florence on 23 October 1739,1 and was in Venice the following April on his way home.2
The 2nd Earl Fitzwilliam was sent abroad to a warmer climate at the age of sixteen, accompanied by the Rev. Thomas Crofts, who was 'an excellent scholar, and a very agreeable companion', recommended by the Headmaster of Eton.1 It was thought that Fitzwilliam was suffering from a certain frailty of constitution, although such fragility is not apparent in contemporary accounts of his Italian visit.  They had already been to France and Switzerland (1764-6) when they set out in December 1766 for Nice. In April 1767 they left France for Italy where Fitzwilliam particularly wished to see his Eton friends Charles James Fox and the 5th Earl of Carlisle. Fox met him in Genoa, probably in May 17672 and they went to see the Regatta at Venice before spending the autumn in Florence. On 1 August Lord Kildare said Fitzwilliam had just arrived in Florence, but that Fox had gone to Turin to meet Lord Carlisle; but Fox was back by 11 August3 and Carlisle was expected at Florence ('but God knows when') on the 18th.3 There they learned Italian and experienced 'the amazing civilities' of Horace Mann. Kildare described (22 Aug.) Fox being in love with a Lady who, he thought, 'has fixed her eye upon' Fitzwilliam,4 and Fox told his parents that he and Fitzwilliam lived 'a great deal together'.5 Fox left in October, but Fitzwilliam was still in Florence with Uvedale Price in December.6  Later that month he arrived in Rome,7 where life was more eventful. He acquired at least two mistresses and developed his interest in virtù. He bought two moonlight landscapes from James Forrester, one of Lake Albano with which he was said to be well pleased8 (both pictures sold Christie's, 19 Jul. 1985), sat for his portrait (which did not turn out well) and in February was negotiating the purchase of two 'very fine portraits, one of Titian, the other of Barroccio'. He described the ancient remains of Rome to his mother: 'the elegance of their architecture, and the beauty of their sculpture surpass everything, that one sees of modern date'. He met William Hamilton in Rome 'one of the truest dilettantis of every sort of virtu that we know', but grumbled at having to subscribe to the Antiquités Etrusques, Grecques et Romaines (the first volume of Hamilton's Greek and Roman Antiquities appeared in 1767). When Hamilton left Rome in April Fitzwilliam was then joined by Lord Carlisle who recalled that, when they kissed the Pope's toe 'Fitzwilliam ... lifted his foot a little off the ground, which made the old man give such a grunt that almost killed me'.9  By 9 May Carlisle and Fitzwilliam were in Naples where the Princess Francavilla was 'extremely civil', owing, thought Carlisle, 'to the account of Lord Fitzwilliam, whom she has found to be very like his uncle, Lord Rockingham [who had been in Italy as Charles, Earl of Malton]'.10 On 2 July Crofts and Fitzwilliam were leaving Florence for Turin11 where Kildare saw them on 12 July with Fox and Uvedale Price, 'but they propose going in a few days'.12 By 16 August Fitzwilliam had joined Carlisle in Mannheim.13 He may have been the 'de Fitzwilliam' listed in Florence on 10 June 1775,14 and the Lord Fitzwilliam listed in Venice in September 1793 and in Rome and Naples by July 1794.15
His travel diary, whence this itinerary is taken, is in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge (Fitzwilliam MS 1777; notes by Mrs M.A. Robertson).

Though Reynolds had warned him that the cares of marriage would ruin him as an artist, Flaxman and his wife had saved enough to go to Italy in 1787. By then Flaxman was a mature artist, well read in Greek and Latin, a skilled designer for Wedgwood, and with a number of monuments to his credit. He had been much encouraged to visit Italy by his friends George Romney and Josiah Wedgwood who also assisted him financially; he intended to stay two years, but the commissions he earned abroad enabled them to stay for nearly eight. His protracted visit is extensively documented.1 They travelled out through Paris with Dr Benjamin Bates and his daughter Lydia (whom Flaxman initially regarded with some favour, see Bates). They entered Italy through Turin and Milan, where Flaxman much admired Leonardo's Last Supper, and continued down through Piacenza, Parma and Bologna, whose baroque painters were criticised for their 'twisted heads ... and bombastic attitudes'. They stayed in Florence, where Flaxman studied Duccio's Rucellai Madonna and found Giotto a 'prodigy of genius', but he was most moved by Ghiberti's Baptistery doors. His admiration for early Italian art was then unusual, and he continued in Siena and Pisa to copy details from Pisano, Ghiberti and Donatello. His study of antiquity was equally intense, as his notes on the sculpture in the Uffizi make particularly clear. He reached Rome in December 1787, but by January 1788 he was in Naples.2 He visited Herculaneum, Pompeii (twice in February) and Paestum, whose temples 'elevated and delighted my mind more than all the other architecture I have seen in Italy'.3 Thereafter his time was spent in Rome; apart from occasional trips in the Campagna, he went to Carrara in February 1791 to supervise the cutting of marble, and to Orvieto in September and December 1792 with William Ottley to make drawings of the bas-reliefs on the facade of the cathedral.4 Many of Flaxman's Italian sketches are contained in three sketchbooks, two in the VAM and one in the YCBA, and in his Notebook in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge.  When he first saw Rome Flaxman was disappointed: the streets were narrow and dark and the ancient ruins were smaller and less striking than he had imagined from Piranesi's prints.5 They lived in the Stalla Mignanelli (near the Piazza di Spagna) from 1788 to 17906 'a pretty set of rooms formerly inhabited by Banks the sculptor' which they took when Tresham left;7 Flaxman described them as lodgings in the Piazza di Spagna, 'where Clérisseau formerly lived, in Cunego's house'.8 From 1791 to 1794 they lived on the Strada Felice 'over the Coffee House'.6 The Flaxmans struggled with the language, Mrs Flaxman describing buying food in the language of the Country or going without: 'I can market very well for Roast Beef & Brocali, & make very Tolerable Apple Dumplings in Italian'.9 Their annual expenses amounted to £120; 'they were oeconomists; but were comfortable' said Farington.5 Mrs Flaxman was enchanted with Rome, 'but the Romans I detest. Lazy & filthy'.9  Flaxman, described by Elizabeth Gibbes as 'a sensible nervous little man',10 was both industrious and retiring. He soon avoided the British artists in the Caffe Inglese, where, he wrote, there 'is always some party, some disagreement and the flame is continually kept up: when winter comes and the people of quality come here, they are then ready to tear each other in pieces for business'.11 Mrs Flaxman scorned the English habit of seeing the Colosseum by moonlight, or the Museo Capitolino by torchlight, habits which could only induce 'coughs and consumption' or the loss of 'much of the true beauty of antiquity'.12 She too was of a serious disposition: 'my Nancy improves much in her drawing to which she gives 8 & 10 hours a day' Flaxman wrote in 1788.3 But they were not without company; 'I have been treated with particular attention by most of the artists of the first eminence, both English and foreigners', wrote Flaxman,13 whose circle came to include Canova and Percier, the French architect, the painters H.D. Hamilton, Guy Head and Henry Howard, and the architects Bunce and Playfair. Guy Head painted his portrait in 1792 (NPG) and Flaxman made a bust of H.D. Hamilton's daughter. The Hamiltons, father and daughter, were 'the chief friends' of their early time in Rome, and had gone with them to Naples in January 1788. Flaxman was also supervising Devaere, Wedgwood's young sculptor in Italy. Flaxman's industry in Rome was considerable, both as a sculptor and as an illustrator. On 25 May 1788 he had told Romney that his first three months in Italy were spent 'in seeing works of art, and making a few drawings; and since that time in settling myself in lodgings'.8 He was then making a terra-cotta copy of the Borghese Vase for Edward Knight (Richard Payne Knight's cousin); he worked on it for three months after his return from Naples and it was sent to England by 30 August.11 For the same patron he made ten drawings, one of The Death of Orpheus from a sarcophagus in the Giustiniani collection (Whitworth AG, Manchester), which were sent off in May 1791, and a marble bust of Homer (which was finished 'all but the last touches' on 7 October 1790).14 His bust of H.D. Hamilton's daughter Harriott was nearing completion in August 1788.11 In the winter of 1789-90 he was working on the Cephalus and Aurora (Lady Lever AG) commissioned by Thomas Hope; he intended to have it cast in two months on 26 January 1790.13 A relief of Hercules delivering Alcestis from Orcus appears to have been finished by 26 January 1790, and he was apparently working on another, Apollo and Marpessa (RA), from 1790. But his largest commission came in March 1790 from the 4th Earl of Bristol for a life-size Fury of Athamas (Ickworth). Flaxman was then about to return to England, and had already written to his parents that they would be seeing him 'in the beginning or end of June [1790]',13 but Bristol's commission, for which Canova had recommended him, would defer his return for two and a half years, he thought.15 Lord Bristol, wrote Flaxman, 'has reanimated the fainting body of art in Rome', and in his enthusiasm he unwisely accepted a fee of £600 which, in the event, scarcely covered the cost of the Carrara marble involved.16 A clay model was nearing completion in October 1790;14 he bought the marble from Carrara on 24 April 1791, and the marble itself was being finished in April 1793.17 Bristol thought it 'exceeded the Laocoon in expression',18 and was superior to Canova's work.19  Although Flaxman had declared that he wanted no further work in Italy, he designed two monuments which were to be completed in England-to William Collins (Chichester Cathedral 1795),20 and Lord Mansfield (Westminster Abbey 1801), on which Sir William Hamilton was consulted; Hamilton, according to Mrs Flaxman, had called Flaxman 'the first artist in Europe & wishes he was a King for his sake'.21 He also worked on the Hercules and Hebe, an ambitious group, encouraged by d'Hancarville and William Hamilton, representing a possible reconstruction of the lost composition of which the Torso Belvedere had formed a part; 'an attempt to restore the Torso & decide the question whether that Figure was in action or repose' commented Parker (Rome List 1792). It was being discussed by Flaxman in March 1792, and Sir William Forbes saw the finished model in April 1793,17 but this group, an over life-size marble, though it aroused the highest expectations, was never completed; it still wanted retouching on 23 November 1793, as Flaxman told his father.22 Thomas Hope paid £341 towards the costs of a marble, but there remains only a small plaster model in the Slade School. In the midst of carving these ambitious works, we find Flaxman making payments for a course of anatomy in Rome in April 1792.  In September 1792 Flaxman told Romney how he was 'finishing Lord Bristol's great group in marble, making a model for a restoration of the Torso Belvedere, and, in the evenings, making a series of drawings from Homer and Dante, which are engraving'.23 Flaxman's illustrations contributed more than his sculpture to his immediate reputation; they made him, said Goethe, 'the idol of all the dilettanti'. His drawings appeared with a minimum of text, it being his intention 'to show how any story may be represented in a series of compositions on the principles of the ancients'.24 His strong linear style had immediately aroused comment; some of the best English artists, wrote Flaxman, 'thought they were copied from the stories on Greek vases'.8 His illustrations to the Iliad and Odyssey, commissioned by Mrs Hare-Naylor and engraved by Tomaso Piroli, were published in 1793 (an English edition appeared in 1795). A second set was made for Robert Udny. Now dispersed, many of these drawings are in the RA and BMPL. Flaxman's Aeschylus illustrations (now dispersed), commissioned in 1792 by the Dowager Countess Spencer, were published in 1795. Thomas Hope commissioned the Dante illustrations in 1792 (Houghton Library, Harvard), intending them for his private use, but a French edition had been pirated by 1802 and an English edition followed in 1807. Flaxman also made for himself some drawings for The Pilgrim's Progress. During his stay in Rome Flaxman purchased some works of art for his friends. In 1788 he commissioned four paintings from Angelica Kauffman for the Rev. Mathew,25 and he bought casts for Romney, dispatching ten large cases from Leghorn in September 1792, and more in March 1794.26  The Flaxmans left Rome in June 1794, their return induced by the progress of the French Revolutionary wars. They stayed five weeks (having intended five days) in Florence, where the beauties 'were like sirens to poor Flaxman, and though he worked like a slave from morning to night, he could not finish the drawings from them in five weeks'.27 The Grand Duke was presented with a copy of the Dante illustrations.28 In July Flaxman was getting marble from Carrara for the English monuments. They passed through Venice and returned through Augsburg and Kassel to London. On his return Flaxman was much involved with the end of import duties charged in England on works by British artists in Italy; he had signed the letter of thanks from British artists in Rome to Prince Augustus in April 1794 and was now thanked by the artists in Rome for his endeavours in London.29 He was elected to the Accademia di S.Luca on 29 September 1816.
Fleetwood was appointed consul in Naples in November 1707; his term was renewed in January 1715, and in May 1723 William Hammond was consul in his stead.1 Rawlinson saw Fleetwood in Rome on 26 May 1721 on his way back to England.2 His wife had predeceased him in Naples and his eldest son, also John (1706-52), was in Naples when his father died in England (25 November 1725), leaving him considerable estate in Surrey.3
W. Fleetwood wrote from Rome on 14 April 1750 with news of the Jacobite court.1 He was presumably the 'Flitudd Cat. Ingles. Magg.Domo - 24' listed at Easter 1750 staying at the Casa Guarnieri with [William] Constable.2
A Jacobite, he was leaving Pesaro on 1 May 1717 for Milan, where he stayed at least three months in the summer; he was listed in Italy in December 1717, and was in Rome in January and February 1718.1 On 13 June 1718 he was in Padua with Viscount Kingston.2
A cadet in the Irish brigade, a worthy good Irishman', he was at Naples with Father Dolphin in May 1779 to greet the young singer Michael Kelly, whom he then accompanied around the city until Kelly's departure in December. Fleming was described by William Hamilton as one who 'speaks the language, and knows where everything remarkable is to be seen'.1 He was still in Naples in July 1781.2



With his governor, William Moncrief, 'a north British Gentleman of the Isle of Orkney',1 Thomas Foley was in Turin in October 1724,2 and sat to Rosalba Carriera in Venice in November.3 They were in Padua on 22 November 1724,4 and passed through Parma (as Moncrief later wrote),5 on their way to Rome, where they arrived late in December. There Stosch alleged they were Tories and received many attentions from the Jacobites.6 They left for Naples on 3 February 1725, and had returned to Rome by 3 March.5 On 9 March Rawlinson saw Foley's collection 'bought of Nicolo Pio' - a book of drawings and fifty prints 'of Raffaelle and the best masters'; he thought it 'a mixed collection, and the price of 1500 crownes is judged large'; Foley and Moncrief left Rome on 4 April 1725 for Florence,7 where they had arrived by 13 April.1

According to the antiquarian Stukely, Folkes, 'quarrelling with Sr Hans Sloane about the presidentship of the Royal Society and being baffled', went to Rome 'with his wife and daughters, dog, cat, parrot and monkey. There his wife grew religiously mad. He went to Venice and got a dangerous hurt upon the leg'.1 Folkes had left England on 25 March 1733, 'and passing thro Germany reached Venice in September following', wrote Birch,2 but Folkes was certainly in Venice by 15 June, when his travel journal opens.3  In Venice, where he stayed some five months, he received 'extraordinary civilities' from the nobility; he 'conversed with many of them in a manner no Englishman has done before', and stayed near the Rialto Bridge in rooms which had been used by Lord March twelve years before.4 He conducted optical experiments before an invited audience in the palace of Signor Giustiniani, his particular friend. He measured the Rialto bridge and the height of the Campanile (by its shadow). Apart from British diplomats, he also met Marshal Schulenberg, whose vast collection of plans and pictures Folkes did not think had been 'collected with the greatest judgment'. On 14 July he called on Rosalba Carriera 'now better than 50' and was 'extreemly well entertained with a great number of fine portraits some of my acquaintance very like.' Three days later he felt driven to reflect on the Roman faith, 'that among the professions of it there seems no modicum between a direct abandon of all religion and a supersticious adoration accompanyd with direct madness'. Elizeus Burges, the British resident, remarked that Folkes (who was 'with his Lady, son, 2 Daughters & 4 servants') was 'a very ingenious man, & loves & understands well most of the Things People come into this Country to see'.5 Mrs Folkes (who had been a distinguished actress) created a different impression: 'In al my life', said an anonymous witness, 'did I never hear such an insupportable creature, nor so much nonsense in so smal a space of time'.6 At the end of July Folkes contracted a sort of heat rash, scotture, which produced a 'sensation like hot needles continually pricking all over especially at the back' (27 Jul.).  On 10 October, with the consul Neil Brown ('one of the best sort of men in the world'), they set out for Padua,7 where Folkes saw the University. He was told it was no longer flourishing as formerly, but there were 'about 600 students which are divided into about 11 nations' (11 Oct.). He inspected the library of the 'English Nation' at the university with the librarian Dr Mengoni and found 'not above 300 vol. and those very ill chose and in bad condition; the English are one of the Nations in this University priviledgd above the rest, and which performing the forms may have their degrees immediately upon their admission' (as opposed to a four-year wait for the less privileged); discipline was very poor and he observed the matriculations book, 'wherein most of the English who go by write their names and give [Mengoni] a pistole or at least a sequin for his attendance' (12 Oct.). On leaving Padua, Folkes made arrangements with a vetturino 'to carry me to Rome in my own berlin and find another for my servants and baggage'. At Loreto the beggars were all too prominent: 'walking a hundred yards in the street it goes beyond all human imagination, and is irksom beyond expression' (23 Oct.). Their greatest mishap was the loss of a 'dutch dog' on the road from Narni, an event, Folkes confessed, which 'has given me far more uneasiness than I think such a sort of thing should'. The dog was eventually returned a few hours after their arrival in Rome on 31 October. They stayed at Giuseppe's on the Corso. Folkes's journal ends two weeks later, when he was busy sightseeing and exchanging visits with English residents. He met Mitchel [presumably Andrew Mitchell] 'a very ingenious Scotch Gentleman I had seen before' (2 Nov.) and the Duke of Richmond had furnished him with introductions to the Princess Pamphili, the Countess Celia Borromea and Cardinal Albani.8 Folkes was still in Rome the following June;9 he had measured some monuments in Rome and between 29 May and 8 June 1734 he visited various collections, including the Villa Mattei, with Andrew Mitchell and Celsius Stevens.10 Nichols said Folkes spent 'a considerable time' in Rome and afterwards some months in Florence before sailing from Leghorn to England, where he arrived on 1 September 1735.2 He was elected to the Florentine Academy on 9 January 1735.11  On his return Folkes presented the Royal Society with a model, made in Rome, of an ancient globe in the Farnese Palace (whose measurements he had noted in his journal on 12 November 1733), and a copy of his Remarks on the Standard Measure preserved in the Capitol of Rome.12 A medallion portrait of Folkes with a Masonic emblem on the verso appears to have been made in Rome in 1742.13



A banker in Leghorn,1 he was presumably the Fonnereau recorded in Florence on 5 May 1770,2 and in Venice on 28 February 1770, 28 May 1778 and 3 October 1779.3
A gentleman of some learning and great dignity, Forbes of Pitsligo had travelled in France in his youth. He went abroad again following the 1715 rising in which he had played an active part. He came to Italy in October 1718 seeking the Pretender, and his Diary1 conveys a pathetic picture of the petty discontents among the Jacobite exiles. Following the Pretender's marriage in September 1719, his bride was not presented to other Jacobites in Rome. Forbes addressed a long letter to James attempting to explain the offence this was causing, but his criticism of James Murray (the Jacobite Earl of Dunbar), who was controlling the Princess's affairs, brought him no Stuart favours. After an audience with the Pope, he left Rome; he missed seeing the Pretender at Montefiascone on 25 October and in November sailed from Leghorn with the Wogan brothers (Charles and Nicholas) to Genoa.
Anne Forbes went to Italy as a young painter, accompanied by her mother Margaret, herself the daughter of the artist William Aikman. Anne's travels were sponsored by a number of interested patrons, including the 7th Earl of Strathmore, Lord Gray, Sir Lawrence Dundas and her grandfather, William Aikman. She had already met James Byres in Scotland in July 1767 and she took with her introductions to Gavin Hamilton and the Abbé Grant. Her brother, Captain John Forbes, travelled out with them, and later returned to bring them home. They had expected to reach Rome in October 1767, and Hayward records their arrival that year.1 In Rome mother and daughter stayed in the Strada Gregoriana. In 1769 the Runciman brothers were staying in the same house (though their names do not appear in the Forbes family correspondence).2 On 1 March 1768 Mrs Forbes wrote that Anne was 'making great progress, and in a month is to try to paint a head, as Mr Byres, Mr [Gavin] Hamilton, [James] Nevay and others who are her directors are of the opinion that the sooner she begins to the colouring the better. She has drawn in chalk several pretty heads and so accurately, that only a great connoisseur would know them from the originals'.3 The heat of the Roman summer led to 'violent headaches when she was applyed too close, which sometimes she was obliged to do to return pictures in a limited time, which were lent her to draw from' (14 Aug. 1768). These included a George III belonging to William Hamilton (who had recently visited Rome),4 and prints after Guercino and Guido Reni.5 In September 1768 Gavin Hamilton proposed 'that she should begin to paint in oil in the month of October and hope that in another year and a half she will be able to make a considerable figure in her own country'.6 In 1769 there was again illness in the heat of summer; she was copying pictures by Volterrano ('a little girl with a fiddle'), Luti ('a boy with a flute'), Correggio (St Agnes) and Guido Reni (a St Jerome and a Magdalen's head, destined for the 3rd Earl of Bute if successful); she also had copies commissioned by Charles Greville.7 On 13 September 1769 Mrs Forbes denied that Anne was about to be engaged: 'the only men to come near her are Hamilton and Nevay', she wrote. In November 1769 Anne was to paint her cousin, Captain John Clerk, who wrote on 8 November that she had 'uncommon talents' and had already painted 'several portraits from Nature'; the portrait was successfully finished by 30 March 1770 (see Capt. John Clerk). Her brother John returned to Rome in May 1770,8 and she was painting his portrait (and one of her sister Elizabeth) in September, by which time she had completed a copy of Titian's portrait of his daughter.9 The same month she was copying Van Dyck's Children of Charles I,10 which Father Thorpe noticed, commenting that her 'pencil is admirable in such performances', and later adding that she 'cannot fail of having a great reputation when she returns'.11 She was making a copy for Lord Arundell (possibly the Van Dyck is again referred to, although Wickstead was also copying it for Arundell), which she was going to finish on her return to England.12 Her portrait of Maria Giovanna Felice painted in Rome was engraved by Smith and she showed An Italian Girl at the RA in 1772. The Forbeses finally left Rome on 15 April 1771 and arrived in Florence five days later; they were then proposing to go to Bologna and Turin and then to Edinburgh via Lyons.13
Charles Forbes escorted the Countess of Mar from England to Milan late in 1718,1 and he was in Rome on 18 November 1719.2 He was presumably the 'Mr Forbes' with whom Lord Primrose's governor quarrelled in Rome in November 1722.3 Stosch said he was about to leave Rome in September 1725, and on 9 February 1726 he reported that 'Forbes, Gentleman and secretary to Pretendant, leaves Rome'.4
Father Forbes was seen in Rome on 19 November 1701.1 Between 9 October 1702 and 16 April 1705 he visited the Duke of Shrewsbury on several occasions endeavouring to convert him, either through a 'short, nonsensical discourse of controversy', or with the news of other conversions; he also told the ailing Shrewsbury that 'several by their intercession to King James had recovered health and limbs'.2
Angelica Kauffman's Self-portrait between Music and Painting (now dated 1791, Nostell Priory) is inscribed, verso: 'for James Forbes, Esq of Stanmore Hill, Middlesex'. Forbes was in Rome in 1796 when he commissioned from Angelica a large painting Religion (with eleven full-size figures). He wrote that at that time he 'had at all times free access to her studio'.1 'James Forbes Inglese Nobile' arrived in Venice on 10 September 1796 with James Edwards (almost certainly the bookseller),2 and a laissez passer from Rome to Ancona for Forbes and Edwards, cavalieri inglesi, dated Rome 30 January [179[7?] is in a private collection.3
John Forbes was in Padua on 9 May 1732 with Charles Talbot, James Thomson and Patrick Murdoch.1 It was presumably the same John Forbes who returned on 16 May 1736 with John Cotton, Thomas Ogilvy and Ernest Leslie, 'Scotsmen all',2 and who was attending the Jacobite Lodge in Rome (of which Cotton became Grand Master) on 6 August.3
Admiral Forbes went to Naples for his health in January 1755 and was in Rome by the end of March.1 He asked Cardinal Albani to find him an antique fragment with a maritime symbol, and in June he was sent one 'avec l'empreinte de Neptune dieu de la mer'. From London in August Forbes sent him in return some porcelain and two fans for the Cardinal's mistress, the Countess Cheroffini.2
Captain Forbes accompanied his mother and sister, Anne Forbes the painter, to Italy in 1767. By 1 March 1768 he had returned to his regiment via Lyons and Paris.1 He returned to Italy in 1770, arriving in Rome in May. With Charles Burney he went to Naples on 14 October 1770, and they left Naples together on 8 November to return to Rome.2 See Anne Forbes.


The 'Tomaso Forbes' who arrived in Venice on 10 May 1774,1 was presumably the Forbes who had been reported in Florence on 5 March with Lord Monson and Lewis Watson.2

Sir William Forbes, an eminent banker, went to Italy when he was past fifty years old for the benefit of his wife's health. They were accompanied by one of their five daughters1 and Forbes described their tour in a journal (Forbes jnl.MSS). 'Although', wrote Forbes, 'we had made a resolution on coming abroad not to purchase either painting or antique', he appears to have been a regular visitor to artists' studios and an occasional purchaser of works of art. In Florence he carefully inspected the British self-portraits in the Uffizi; he bought a drawing of the Young Pretender by Giannini from the artist, though it was 'not a pleasing likeness', (2 Dec. 1792) and had his Newfoundland dog painted by Martin Quadal. Their first stay in Rome was short, but there was time for Patrick Moir to take them to the house of the Abbé Waters to see his Stuart portraits, and they met Gavin Hamilton, Jacob More and Archibald Skirving. On 5 December they left for Naples, where Forbes visited the studios of the Hackert brothers, G.A. Wallis, Don Tito (Lusieri) and Tischbein, buying some views from Lusieri and four coloured outlines of Etruscan vases from Tischbein. His cicerone was James Clark who had hired them lodgings 'in a large Hotel called the Corcelli, kept by a Frenchman of the name of Rollin', once butler to the Duke of Gloucester. Anna, Baroness Berwick, with her daughters and a Colonel Pelham stayed on the same floor; below them were Mr and Mrs Robert Parker and a Mr and Mrs Jones.  They returned to Rome late in March 1793 and stayed first at Margherita's but, finding this hotel 'small and inconvenient' and 'damp', they moved in April to lodgings on the Corso, just vacated by the Duchess of Ancaster, and near Thomas Jenkins. Forbes continued to use Moir, a fellow Scot, as his banker and cicerone, but this did not prevent him being friendly with Jenkins. Among the less conventional visits with Moir, Forbes described the fine antiquities in the Palazzo Rondinini and the discomfort of climbing from the dome into the lantern and ball on the roof of St Peter's, 'like being in an Oven'; Moir had once dropped a heavy key from his coat pocket while descending the near-vertical ladder, 'a very ugly accident'.  Forbes continued his visits to artists' studios, calling on Canova ('I suppose the first statuary at present in the world'), Zucchi, Flaxman, Hewetson and Angelica Kauffman. His eye was critical, and after seeing portraits by 'Robertson' [Hugh Robinson] he reflected that 'it gave me but a poor opinion of the state of Portrait painting in Rome to find him so much imployed'. He bought drawings by John Moir, Patrick's brother, and an undated invoice for £128.16 from James Byres2 (who had left Rome in 1790 but Moir carried on his business), suggests further purchases. Forbes evidently enjoyed the social life in Rome, 'we never needed to be at a loss where to spend our evenings', he wrote. Lady Throckmorton introduced them to the Princess Borghese, and Madame Cicciaporci to Prince Augustus and the Princess Santa Croce, Sir William Forbes noting that the latter's family was of Valerian blood [Valerius Publicola]. They received 'the utmost kindness' from the Legards and the Corbets. Again through Lady Throckmorton, they were admitted to a meeting of the Arcadians, in a building 'of no great show or ornament, the walls hung round with old portraits'. On 14 April Forbes attended Anglican communion, commenting that this was the only time 'we had the benefit of being present at Protestant worship', during the whole of our being abroad' (14 Apr. 1793). Lady Forbes's health, which had improved in Naples, declined in Rome, a factor which, with Forbes's business commitments, led to a sudden departure on 8 May 1793.  A collection of drawings formed by Forbes was sold in 1968 (Sotheby's, 28 Mar.), but many were acquired after his return from Italy from the MacGowan collection (sold in Edinburgh in 1804). His eldest son, Sir William Forbes, 7th Bt., made a collection of old master paintings through James Irvine (sold Rainy's, 2 June 1842).3

We had this spring at Rome a young gentleman of the name of Fuller, with his sister a Miss Forbes ... They seemed both to be patterns of goodness, but are, I fear, but a short time for this world' (Knight Letters, 99; 2 May 1781).

A Jacobite, he was recorded at Rome from 1 January to April 1718, then at Venice with a Captain Wright; in June 1718 they were in Paris.1 He was doubtless the Ford in Rome with John Berkeley, Thomas Stanhope and Theophilus, Lord Oglethorpe, mentioned by Kent on 18 January 1718,2 and the Charles Ford in Padua on 29 April 1718 with John Berkeley.3
In the later 1730s Ford left for France and Italy where he spent several years studying; on the way home he stayed in London. He returned in 1742 to Dublin where he became a teacher of drawing and painting, as well as a picture restorer and dealer (Strickland).N. F.


Fordyce, who saw 'all Italy with vast diligence and attention' and 'collected a vast store of usefull knowledge, both of the ancient and modern state of the country',1 was drowned off Holland on his return journey in 1751 (DNB).
The William Forester in Padua on 15 December 1709 with Dr John Savage,1 was doubtless the 'Mr Forrester an English gentleman of great merit, [with] his tutor a good humoured pleasant man that understands the world perfectly well', in Rome in September 1710 (see John Digby).
Signora Giocosa Forester 55 Inglesa' was living near Trinita dei Monti, Rome in 1777;1 she may be identified as the 'Madama Forrester Poetessa Inglese' who was elected to the Arcadian Academy on 13 February 1777,2 and as the Giaconda Forrester who died in Rome on 18 August 1796 and was buried in the Protestant cemetery.3  The Ramsays had met Mrs Forester at Tivoli several times between July and September 1783.4


Travelling with Lord Malton, Major Forrester wrote from Siena on 23 June 1749 thanking Lord Rockingham (Malton's father) for having tried to obtain permission for him to buy a lieutenant-colonelcy in his regiment, in which he had served for 27 years; he described himself as 'the Eldest Major in the Army' (Malton letters MSS).
Forrester spent the last twenty years of his life in Rome, where he practised with some success as a landscape painter. He arrived in Rome in 17551 and by Easter he was living in the Strada della Croce with the painters Robert Crone and Jacob Ennis; in 1758 he lived near the Piazza di Spagna in the same house as the French artist L-G. Blanchet. By 1763 he had moved to the Strada Felice with George Dance and the amateur artist Peter Stephens; from 1765 to 1773 he lived on the Via Babuino (sharing with Joseph Nollekens until 1770), and from 1774 until his death he was with Father Thorpe on the Corso.2 Although, with his compatriots Hugh Dean and Solomon Delane, he was accused by Philipp Hackert of slavishly aping the styles of Gaspard Poussin and Claude instead of referring directly to nature,3 Forrester's sombre and slowly executed4 paintings found ready purchasers among British travellers in Rome. Two moonlit scenes dated 1766 were bought by William, Earl Fitzwilliam, in 1767. Other landscapes were acquired by the Duke of Gloucester (a moonlit scene, commissioned in 1772 and unfinished in 1774), Lord Bute, Lord Arundell, Lord Shelburne and Colonel Ward. Eight drawings by Forrester of Italian scenes were bought by the 1st Earl of Portarlington (as mentioned by Thomas Jenkins in December 1769).5 Forrester also acted as a drawing master (for example, to Sir Watkin Williams Wynn in November and December 17686). Occasionally Forrester practised as an etcher: in 1760, as well as contributing two of his own drawings, Forrester had etched fifteen plates after Peter Stephens for the latter's 150 Views of Italy [1762], see Stephens.  Jonathan Skelton and Father Thorpe were his particular friends in Rome. Skelton wrote on 20 August 1758 that there were 'some very good young men' among the young British artists studying in Rome, of whom one 'is my very particular Friend, his name is Forrester, I have learn'd many excellent things from him in private Life. He studies Painting in my own way and is very ingenious'. Following Skelton's early death in January 1759, Forrester was among those who helped to settle his affairs.7 His friendship with Father Thorpe began some ten years later. In 1771 Thorpe explained to his patron Lord Arundell 'I have many & great obligations to Forrester who has laid by every other work to Serve me in your commissions, & in the present circumstances of the Jesuits in Rome I should have been hindered from serving you if I could not have had his honest assistance with assurance of secrecy'8 (see Father John Thorpe). It also appears that Forrester had been receiving an annuity from Lord Arundell.9  In June 1769 Forrester made a three-week excursion from Rome across Umbria to Ancona with his artist friends George Robertson and Joseph Nollekens (together with Richard and Esther Dalton, Joseph Rose, [Gavin?] Hamilton and the unidentified Miss Robinson and De Angelis). Forrester wrote a descriptive and practical narrative account of their journey which was subsequently published by Robertson as A Tour Made in Italy in the Year 1769 [1787]; the volume includes a final section, 'Miscellaneous Observations Useful to Painters', compiled by Robertson from material collected by Forrester, describing some of the practices of the painters Benjamin West, Thomas Jenkins, Mengs and others.  Forrester appears occasionally to have acted as a dealer. On 22 June 1771 he applied to export forty-four paintings (five of them described as 'modern', which may have been by his own hand).10 An undated letter from Timothy Collopy refers to Forrester's activities as a dealer; he owned a version of the Descent from the Cross by Lo Spagnoletto, and Collopy added (somewhat doubtfully) that 'Mr Dashwood [probably Thomas Dashwood] has been told that you have been set up in the dealing way by Mr Jenkins in opposition to some others'.11  Forrester died in Rome at the age of forty-five on 31 January 1776,12 and his memorial was recorded in 1869 in the Church of S.Maria del Popolo.13
Lady Pomfret mentioned a 'Mr Forester' in Florence in February 1740 (Pomfret jnl.MSS, 20 Feb. 1740).


Though the spellings of the name vary, the following disjointed references to a Jacobite officer/courtier in Italy between 1717 and 1724 probably describe the same person.  A letter for 'a Mr Forester' awaited collection in Rome in December 1716,1 and Forester was one of several Jacobites who arrived in Venice from Florence in March 1717.2 'Forster' was listed in Italy in December 1717.3 General T. Forster wrote from Fano in February 1718 saying that one of the operas was very good, but the inhabitants seem to prefer farce to music,4 and the same month he was with William Erskine and 'Barkley' (presumably the Rev. G.Barclay) in Pesaro.5 He saw the Earl of Mar at Urbino in March 1718,6 and wrote on 1 April describing the 'comical scene among our chimerical statesmen here' when the Pretender left.7 Forster delivered a letter to the Pretender at Montefiascone on 9 October 1719,8 and Foster was in Rome on 8 February 1721.9 In November 1722 there was a report that General Forester/Forster was to supplant [Col.John] Hay in the Pretender's household;10 and Forster, of the Pretender's household, quarrelled violently with Andrew Ramsay in Rome in May 1724.11  A Jacobite Thomas Forster came from France to Italy with Lancelot Allgood in 1737 and a 'Forester' with evident Jacobite sympathies was in Italy with Lord Annandale in 1738, see Allgood and George, 3rd Marquess of Annandale.
A young gentleman on his travels', he took the painter James Russel with him in his post-chaise from Rome to Naples.1 A 'Chichester Fortescue' (apparently also Irish) was on a grand tour in 1741-2.2
Two Fortescues were in Geneva in August 1792;1 Robert Parker met two Fortescues in Naples in the winter of 1792-3, referring to one as George;2 and two Fortescues were in Rome on 1 April 1793,3 and a Fortescue 'con su fratello Inglesi' was in Venice in April and May.4
A Mr Fortescue was at the Academy in Turin in October 1716.1 Hugh Fortescue was in Padua with his tutor William Carswell on 21 December 1716,2 and left Naples for Rome with a companion in the second week of March 1717.3 As Lord Clinton he erected a monument to Carswell in the early 1740s at Filleigh (now demolished).4
Fortescue and 'Coffe' were reported in Florence on 10 January 1767.1 On 24 January they were presented at Court by Horace Mann and invited to dine with the Grand Duke.2 On 23 May 'Giacomo Fortiscive' arrived in Venice with 'Tomaso Cuff'.3 A portrait by Batoni, signed and dated 1767, is said to be of Thomas Fortescue (Clark/Bowron 311; art market).
Tommaso Fortescue' arrived in Venice on 10 May 1774;1 he was presumably the 'Forteschin' who had been in Florence on 8 January with George Grenville and 'Milord Stulohrer' [who ought to be Lord Bulkeley].2
Fortescue was in Trieste in October 1785 with the Bulkeleys (the 7th Earl and his Countess); Lord Bulkeley being then ill, Fortescue was prevailed upon 'not to carry his politeness too far' and left them to go on to Florence.1 He was later seen in Rome during the winter of 1785-6.2

Fortrose spent a considerable part of his life abroad. As Kenneth Mackenzie, he was in Naples with his father in the summer of 1752, and a 'Mackenzie' was listed in Capua on 11 June 1752.1 In the winter of 1754-5 Robert Adam met him in Nice with his tutor, a Dr Mackenzie, and said he had never seen 'a little creature of more spirit, sense and sweetness than this little milord, as they call him, who speaks all languages with equal facility'.2 A portrait of him with Dr Mackenzie, attributed to Nathaniel Hone, was sold in 1988 (Sotheby's, 16 Nov.). On 1 November 1763 Mackenzie with a Mr Gualtieri again passed through Capua on his way to Naples.3 He had now become Lord Fortrose, but his new title did not prevent him misbehaving at the Teatro S.Carlo and speaking disrespectfully of the King, so that he was obliged to leave the city.4 By 14 December he was in Rome, where he was painted by Dance in a conversation piece with Gualtieri, the picture being seen by James Martin in the painter's studio in May 1764.5 The Abbé Grant, describing him as 'a mighty clever and sprightly young man', said he was the first that the antiquarian Colin Morison ever waited on in Rome, and that he left Rome early in February 1764.6 By the end of June 1764 he was in Brunswick, where Boswell described him as 'a lively pretty young man, with the most perfect elegance of manners, having been abroad a great many years'.7 From 1764 to 1768 he was in Britain. Fortrose returned to Italy in 1768. He apparently spent some time in Genoa, where Madame Balbi was wanting to be remembered to him in April 1769; 'she thinks of him often since she keeps in her Bedchamber the Landskip he gave her'.8 He was in Florence by 16 October 1768,9 and he attended the dinner on the 22nd held to mark Horace Mann's investiture with the Order of the Bath.10 In December he was in Naples.11 In April 1769 he was planning a visit to Sicily and Malta with William Hamilton, from which they had returned in July.12 Fortrose was seen in Naples in February and May 1770,13 and on 6 November 1770 he gave a lavish entertainment for Dr Charles Burney, at which Caffarelli sang.14 Sometime in 1771 Fabris painted two interior views of Fortrose's principal apartment in Naples, one with a group of musicians (who include Hamilton, Gaetano Pugnani and, allegedly, the young Mozart), the other with a group of fencers (both SNPG).15  It was at this time that Fortrose got to know Mr and Mrs Edward Walter, on whose fourteen-year-old daughter and heiress, Harriot, he began to form matrimonial designs. In the spring of 1771 he was in Rome with them,16 planning to go with them to Venice for the Easter festivities and afterwards to Paris.17 'Mylord Fhortons' was in Florence on 27 April,18 and in Venice by 20 May,15 but his assiduity was in vain. 'I fear Mother Walter has been too cunning for Lord Fortrose', Tierney wrote, 'since he is not yet in possession of the Girl'.19 In 1774 Harriot Walter married Lord Grimston, while Lord Seaforth (as Fortrose had become) consoled himself with another, less eligible Harriet, an apothecary's daughter, publicly his mistress and privately his wife. Lord Fortrose was something of a virtuoso. 'I beg you will tell Lord Fortrose that Neville caught the distemper of him at Naples', Humphry Morice told William Hamilton in April 1769, 'but it did not break out till lately & he is now stark raving after cameos & intaglios'.20 Two sketches of Lord Seaforth by Patch probably date from the period 1768- 71,21 and Fortrose commissioned pairs of views of Palermo by Fabris dated 1770, and of Naples by Pietro Antoniani which were sold in 1990 (Christie's, 9 Apr.). It was also said that Fortrose had offered '20,000' for Raphael's Madonna della sedia.22


Lady Elizabeth Foster was one of the most fascinating women of her day, and well aware of it. Her admirers included such diverse figures as Edward Gibbon and Count Axel Fersen, and she managed to capture the heart of the phlegmatic 5th Duke of Devonshire and to retain the warm affection of his wife, Georgiana. The Devonshire-Foster ménage à trois is one of the oddest episodes in the history of English society, and the Devonshire connection was responsible for each of Lady Elizabeth's three visits to Italy.1 In the spring of 1782 she had recently been separated from her husband, who had the custody of their two sons; she was in poor health, and she had only £300 a year to live on. It was her new friend the Duchess of Devonshire who suggested, with characteristic generosity, that 'the poor little thing' should be paid to take the Duke's young illegitimate daughter Charlotte William on a continental tour.2 At the end of December 1782 she accordingly set out with her small charge, whom she soon came to regard as a disagreeable burden. She went first to Nice and then to consult Dr Tissot at Lausanne. By the end of summer 1783 she was in Turin and by November in Rome, where she was presented by Cardinal de Bernis to the Pope. She had broken more than one heart along the way, and at Naples early in 17843 Count Axel Fersen (better remembered for his connection with Marie-Antoinette) fell in love with her. She was back in Rome in April and she was doubtless the 'Miledi Forster' who attended a dinner given in Rome by the Venetian ambassador for the King of Sweden on 12 April; on the 21st she was dining with the Berrys and Jonas Brooke.4 By July she was in England; her charge, Charlotte, now spoke French and Italian fluently and was 'vastly clever'. Only a few months after her return to England, Lady Elizabeth again set out for the Continent. The reason for this second visit, so soon after the first, was that she was expecting a child by the Duke of Devonshire. She left England at the end of 1784, passed through Paris, where she was joined by her brother and sister-in-law, Lord [John Augustus] and Lady Hervey, and arrived in Turin on 23 March. Two days later she started a journal (priv. coll.), which reads like the pages of a novel. Her mental anguish was real enough-she stood in danger of ruining her reputation and of destroying the prospect of a delightful new life which was just beginning to open before her-but she never lost her self-awareness, nor failed to relish the drama of her situation. From Turin she went to Milan, Florence, Rome and Naples. At Naples, where she had arrived by the end of April,5 she lived with her brother until on 21 June she moved to Ischia, where she intended that her child should be born. So far she had told no one her secret, but now she was forced to reveal her condition to her brother and to her French servant Louis. It was decided that Ischia was not sufficiently secluded for her confinement, and in the last week of July she was escorted by her brother to Vietri, where 'at a house little better than a house of fame' her daughter Caroline St Jules was born on 16 August.6 She was attended only by Louis, whose wife she pretended to be and to whom she entrusted the baby on her departure from Vietri on 22 August. She remained at Naples throughout the following autumn and winter. In October she sat to Angelica Kauffman, who painted the head at Naples and finished the picture later in Rome (it is now at Ickworth);7 her pensive expression, the miniature of the Duchess of Devonshire round her neck, and the view of Ischia in the background all seem to hint at her recent ordeal. In Holy Week she went to Rome to join her father, and in May she set out from Rome to Venice with Anne Damer, who at about this time made a wax profile of her, afterwards copied for the Duchess of Devonshire. Lady Elizabeth and Mrs Damer reached England in July. She bore a second child by the Duke of Devonshire, (William Clifford, b. Rouen 1788, later Sir Augustus Clifford). She next visited Italy in 1792 with the then exiled Duchess of Devonshire, who in turn had left England to give birth to an illegitimate child, see Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire. The last years of her life-from 1815, which fall outside the scope of this Dictionary-were spent in Rome where, as the Dowager Duchess of Devonshire, she is best remembered for having undertaken the excavations of the base of the columns of Phocas in the Forum in 1813.

In April 1771 Henry Fothergill was going from Portici to Naples with John Stepney (both described as members of Parliament) when their carriage overturned; Fothergill broke his leg which had to be amputated later that month.1 He had to stay in Naples until September; his banker refused him an advance, 'thinking no doubt that [he] might have died on the road', but George Tierney lent him money for his return journey.2 James Byres found him 'tolerably hearty' in Rome, and he then spent 'some time' in Florence.3 He was presumably the 'Enrico Forthergill' in Venice on 1 November with Henry Cotton,4 and he had reached England by March 1772.2
A Gentleman of Scotland', he killed Denys Wright in a drunken quarrel over cards at a public dinner in Florence in August 1737, in the presence of Lord Middlesex. Fotheringham was wounded and retired to Lucca attended by Dr James Tyrrell; Wright expired forgiving him (SP 98/40, f.179; Fane, 26 Aug. 1737. SP 98/41, f.82; Walton, 26 Aug. 1737. Wal. Corr., 37:33 n1).


Foulis, a portrait painter, was living on the Strada Condotta over the Greek Coffee House in Rome in 1790, and in 1793 he was listed as a history and portrait painter at the Casa di Battoni, where John Frearson was also lodged (Rome Lists). He was presumably the 'Giacomo Fals Scozzese Pittore' living in the Via Babuino in the Casa dell Accademia di S.Luca at Easter 1791.1 On 7 May 1793 Sir William Forbes met him in Rome with Jacob More and Skirving; Forbes was 'personally acquainted' with Foulis, 'who is very modest, and tho but an indifferent portrait painter, he is now established at Edinburgh and has painted some strong likenesses'.2 In April 1794 Foulis (his name printed as James Foules) signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus from English artists at Rome (Rome List 1794). He was probably the painter 'James Faulio' (also 'Faulig' and 'Forlio') who arrived at Venice on 11 June 1794 with a German painter ('Louis Struch') and Antonio Rossi, a Genoese merchant; they left together five days later.3
When he first came to Italy in 1702 at the age of twenty six, Sir Andrew Fountaine was established as a remarkable scholar, the friend and correspondent of Leibnitz. He was also versed in diplomacy; he had been knighted in 1699 and in 1701 had accompanied Lord Macclesfield to Hanover to deliver the Act of Succession.1 'The sweetness of his conversation', it was subsequently observed in Italy, offset his 'great Erudition' and 'knowledge & experience in medals, statues, carvings & designing'.2  Fountaine arrived in Padua with Lord Woodstock (later 1st Duke of Portland) on 20 March 1702,3 and he visited the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome on 5 April.4 In June he told Leibnitz that he was 'enjoying the conversation of Cardinal [Enrico] Noris [a numismatist] and Monsignor Bianchini [an archaeologist], whom I take to be the most learned Antiquary in [Rome]'.5 He sat to Carlo Maratti for the beautiful chalk drawing now at Narford, and probably acquired on this first visit the two small Marattis on copper (Holy Family and Marriage of St Catherine) which also remain at Narford. Fountaine had apparently intended to meet the 8th Earl of Pembroke in Naples, but was refused a passport on the grounds of his religion.6 He was in Augsburg by 27 September 1702, in Zell in March 1703, and had returned to England before the end of that year. His second visit to Italy followed a long stay in Paris in 1714. He was still in Paris in February 1715, but in August he was in Turin and in October in Florence.7 In 1715 Fountaine sat to Giulio Pignatta in the Tribuna in Florence with the friends who were then travelling with him: Anthony Lowther, Richard Arundell, a Frenchman de Centville, and Captain William Price, who is shown bringing in a tray of medals from the Medici collection (the picture is at Narford). Fountaine became very friendly with the Grand Duke Cosimo III, who corresponded with him and whose portrait by Domenico Tempesti, dated 1717, remains at Narford. Fountaine encouraged A.D. Gabbiani, Giuseppe Chiari and Luti to give their self-portraits to the Grand Duke's gallery. The Florentine A.F. Selvi made Fountaine's medallion portrait in 1715 with, on the reverse, Pallas examining medals on a cippus.  On 12 October 1715 William Kent had heard that Fountaine, with Lord Herbert's step-brother [i.e. Richard Arundell], was coming to Rome, and he had arrived by 14 January 1716 with Lowther and Arundell.8 In February he was assisting Lord Harrold in the choice of subjects for history paintings by Chiari.9 Kent wrote on 20 March that his friend Fountaine was making a collection of drawings; this he confirmed in a letter of 9 June in which he also said Fountaine had given him a ring set in gold.10 Fountaine intended leaving Rome in April in order to see the Easter festivities at Venice, and he was still in Venice on 21 August.11 On 26 September, with Lowther and Arundell, he left for Germany,12 Fountaine and Arundell visiting Padua on 30 September.13  Fountaine accumulated a vast collection of medals,14 drawings, prints, sculpture and maiolica, but it remains unclear how much he acquired in the course of his two visits to Italy. Lord Burlington complained to him from Turin in 1719 'cosucci [bagatelles] are so scarce since you drained Italy'.15 Fountaine's coin collection was dispersed probably in the 1720s, a great part being acquired by the 2nd Duke of Devonshire and the 6th Earl of Pembroke.14

Interrupting his Oxford studies, Fox left England in September 1766 to meet his parents, Lord and Lady Holland, in Lyons in October. He then sailed with his father and his cousin Lord Offaly (who became the Marquess of Kildare in November 1766) from Marseilles to Naples, where they spent the following winter, together with Stephen Fox, Charles's older brother, and Stephen's wife, Lady Mary, see Henry, 1st Baron Holland.1  Fox left the rest of his family in Turin on 26 April 1767 and went on to Genoa to meet the 2nd Earl Fitzwilliam and Uvedale Price, Eton schoolfriends. Together they went to Venice for Ascension and then passed the summer in Florence. On 6 August Fox wrote 'I read nothing but Italian, which I am immoderately fond of, particularly of the poetry'. Kildare noticed that Fox 'has persuaded himself that he is in love', but he was very neglectful of the lady who appeared to have 'fixed her eye upon' Fitzwilliam.2 Fox told his parents on 22 September that he and Lord Fitzwilliam 'live a great deal together'. He was still in Florence with Kildare on 17 October, but by the 27th they had arrived together at Turin; by 4 November Fox had left for France.3 He left Paris later the same month for the Riviera with the 5th Earl of Carlisle,4 and in December he was with his parents (who had returned to France) spending the winter in Nice. In April 1768 he sailed from Nice to Genoa where he again met Carlisle. They travelled through Bologna and Parma to Florence and by the end of April they had reached Rome. There Carlisle left him, but Fox remained to see the arrival of Maria Carolina, the new Queen of Naples, on 14 May. He then intended to return home via Terni, Loreto, Venice and Turin. He met Kildare, Fitzwilliam and Price in Turin in July,5 and with Price he visited Voltaire at Ferney in August.  Twenty years later, when he was the conspicuous leader of the opposition in Parliament, Fox returned to Italy with Mrs Armitstead, whom he was to marry in 1795. They left London in August 1788 and were in Venice in October staying at Pedrillo's. James Hare, a celebrated wit and Fox's close friend, was seen with Fox in Venice on 17 October and was perhaps travelling with them.6 Their brief tour ended at Bologna when a messenger brought news of George III's insanity and Fox, having received the news with 'great signs of exaltation',7 returned to England within nine days. Mrs Armitstead accompanied him as far as Lyons and then proceeded alone at a more leisurely pace. In 1794 Fox wrote several letters recalling his own travels to his nephew, young Lord Holland (see Henry, 3rd Baron Holland), who was then in Italy.8 He had had no Italian master in Naples, 'so I taught myself'; in Florence 'I advise you to have a master and to read Dante and other difficult books'; he had 'always been partial' to Titian and Tintoretto, and considered Titian's Paul III in the Pitti 'by far the finest portrait in the world', while 'to doubt about Correggio, seems to me just as if a man were to doubt about Homer, or Shakespeare, or Ariosto'.

Stephen Fox left England at the end of November 1723 to visit the Low Countries, France and Italy under the supervision of John Wigan. Two portraits of a Mr Fox are listed in Rosalba Carriera's diary for December 1724.1 He was living with Wigan on the Strada Felice in Rome at Easter 1725,2 and on 12 April they had set out for Florence on their way home.3 He was joined by his brother Henry in Paris that summer and had returned to England in October.4 For his second visit to Italy, see John, Baron Hervey.
In the autumn of 1766 Stephen Fox and his new wife, Lady Mary, travelled overland from Marseilles to Naples with his mother, his younger brother Henry and his cousin Clotworthy Upton, see Henry, 1st Baron Holland. In Naples they joined his father Lord Holland, his younger brother Charles and his cousin Lord Offaly (see Kildare). According to his mother, Stephen suffered from deafness and shyness and his size was 'enormous', but Lady Mary, on whom Stephen doted, grew 'more amiable every day'.1 In December Kildare wrote that 'Ste' 'continues deaf [and] has been laid up with gnat bites upon his legs'.2 At the end of February 1767 Stephen and Lady Mary left the rest of the party in Naples, intending to see Venice, Genoa and Leghorn; Stephen was 'very glad to go', wrote his mother; 'he is heartily tired of Naples'.3 In the event they stayed in Rome, where Lady Mary sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 323; priv. coll.); Piranesi subsequently dedicated to her a plate in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778]. Early in April they rejoined the Holland party in Florence and travelled with them as far as Turin, whence they travelled on their own straight back to England through France.4 The Batoni portrait was dispatched from Rome in January 1769.5
William Fox arrived in Venice on 28 October 1793 at the beginning of his visit to Italy1 which he described in his Sketches and Observations made on a Tour through various parts of Europe in the years 1792, 1793, and 1794 [1797], in the form of 36 letters. 'Interspersed with trivial anecdotes, commonplace remarks about famous works of art, and complaints about the filthiness of inns, are quotations from the works of J.B. Dupaty, Dr Moore, and Mrs Piozzi, which occasionally help to enliven the dullness of his text' (RBF note).


Comparatively little is known concerning Foy's six years in Italy. He spent some time studying the Grand Ducal collections in Florence, before proceeding to Rome; he was allowed to make a cast from Michelangelo's Bacchus, but not of the Apollo de' Medici,1 and he made a copy of Titian's Venus of Urbino for William Constable.2 He reached Rome in 1773,3 sometime before Easter, when he was living in the Strada dei Greci; in 1774 he stayed in the Via Babuino.4 Thomas Banks soon found him a congenial companion: in July he wrote that since his own arrival in Rome (in September 1772), Foy had appeared, 'a sculptor, a very ingenious, worthy young man; he is doing a copy of the Apollo Belvidere in marble about five feet and a half high'.5 On 27 November 1776 Foy was amongst the group of artists whom Thomas Jones met at the Cafe degli Inglesi.6 Foy sculpted a bust of Allan Ramsay c.1775 as well as a relief of the head of James Durno (which appeared in Thomas Banks's posthumous sale in 1805).7 In 1777 'Mr Foy, at Rome' exhibited 'A Busto of an Artist' at the SA.



Philip Francis described his rapid tour of Italy, made in 1772 with a Mr Godfrey, in a travel diary (Francis jnl.MSS). They went out overland and began with a two-week stay in Venice in the Regina d'Inghilterra, where the apartments were 'handsome, spacious and convenient'. At Pesaro they discussed the Italian method of reckoning time, 'Italy being the only country in the world where they compute the hours from Sunset'. In Rome, where they first stopped briefly on their way to Naples, 'for the first time in Italy' they enjoyed 'good bread & eatable Butter'. They first stayed at Emanuel's in Naples but after six days were obliged to resign their apartments to the Princess Francavilla (but their neighbour James Hugh Smith Barry, not bound by the same agreement, did not cede his rooms to the Prince). They were presented to the King and Queen by the Rev. William Preston (to whom they had an introduction),2 but there was 'no great ceremony', and they attended a masked ball at Court which they left at midnight, the Queen still dancing. 'When I see their Majesties together', wrote Francis, 'I think of the Rape of Proserpine'. They dined with Charles Townley and the banker George Tierney, and on 30 September Godfrey sat for his picture. Francis warned in his diary of the Aria Cattiva: both he and Godfrey were very ill of it and, said Francis, 'I think it almost a Miracle that we are alive. From 1 July to 1 October, or until the heavy October rains are over, it is absolutely unsafe to cross the country from Rome to Naples'.  Returned to Rome, they stayed at Benedetto's before getting 'an admirable lodging' near the Piazza di Spagna. The Abbé Grant made a fuss of them, introducing them to Clement XIV at Castel Gandolfo on 15 October. This proved a remarkable audience. They were 'most graciously received' and sat down closely by the Pope ('of which it seems there never was an instance'); he 'frequently laid his Arm across my shoulder, & called us cari miei figli', and he assured them that his election as Cardinal and Pope had been 'much against his will'. He sent six bottles of Burgundy to the Convent where Francis and Godfrey were dining that evening, and lent them a coach to return to Town. Francis noticed that 'the worthy Abbé Grant' was careful not to lose by their presence, and 'obliged Mr Godfrey to give him 6 sequins for a fan, not worth one'; he would not take them to see the Young Pretender, yet, commented Francis, 'the time has been when [he] would not have been so scrupulous'. On 16 October Francis sat for a miniature by S.Giorgio. They were back in Dover on 13 December, just five months after their departure.


Frankland was in Florence with his nephew Thomas Worsley in December 1739 and left on his own for Rome on 27 February 1740.1 Horace Walpole later mentioned to Mann 'Billy Bristow, and that sillier Fred Frankland, two oafs whom you have seen in Italy'.2

Thomas Frankland met the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome on 6 December 1704.1 He had arrived that month in Rome from Florence, and was anonymously described as 'one of the prettiest young gentlemen I ever saw and [he] hath a right genius for perfectly understanding architecture, painting, and the curiosities of Rome'.2 At Easter 1705 he was living in the Strada della Croce.3 In Rome he had also met Christian Cole, for whom he took a book to Rosalba Carriera in Venice in May 1705; Cole said Frankland had seen 'tutti li belli quadri' and 'molti delli pittori' in Rome, and was 'grand amatore' of painting.4 The Duke of Shrewsbury saw him again in Venice on 27 May and 1 July 1705,1 and Frankland was in William Kerr's party at Padua on 6 June.5
Possibly also the 'Tommaso Frisa' who came from Florence to Venice where he stayed from 1-6 May 1793 with 'Roberto Belli'[?] before leaving for the Tyrol; ASV IS 767).


A young painter of genteel fortune and family',1 he set out for Italy with the painter William Theed in 1790. Theed was recalled to England when they reached Florence, and Frearson went off alone for Rome on 16 April 1790.2 Theed returned to Italy later that year, and Mrs Flaxman saw Frearson and Theed several times at Rome in February and March 1791.3 With Henry Howard, Frearson tended Theed during his illness in 1792.4 From Easter 1793 to Easter 1796 Frearson ('Trearson') was listed living on the Via Babuino, 'verso il Monte' in the house of Sigr.Bavari.5 In 1793 his name appeared on a printed list as a history painter living in the Casa di Battoni (where James Foulis was also lodged) and in April 1794 Frearson signed the letter of thanks from British artists in Rome to Prince Augustus (Rome List 1793, 1794). He visited Naples in the summer of 1795, when Theed implied that Frearson would soon be returning to England.6 On 31 May 1796 he arrived in Venice from Rome, and again on 22 July, this time with Theed as they made their way home.7

Charles Frederick and his older brother John travelled in 'most of the countries of Europe' and in the Near East in 1737-9.1 John's interest in virtù was that of a man of fashion, but Charles was a serious antiquarian and a talented amateur draughtsman. An incomplete travel journal by John described the first six weeks of their tour in Italy (from 30 September to November 1737). They were in Genoa at the end of September and proceeded via Pavia, Milan and Parma to Bologna. They had reached Rome by the end of the year, and a porcelain cameo of John Frederick was dated Rome 1737.1 In January 1738 Charles attended a dinner given by Sir Thomas Dereham for members of the Royal Society,2 and George Sinclair saw him during the Carnival on 17 February.3 Later that year he sat to Casali (Ashmolean); 'Mr Frederick and his Friends in Rome' particularly encouraged that artist, who later painted Frederick in England.4 Frederick had some dealings with the antiquary Ficoroni, acquiring from him an antique bas-relief,5 but he failed to get a bronze cista which Ficoroni owned.6 Some of the marbles he purchased were subsequently acquired by Charles Townley.  The brothers presumably sailed to the Near East from Italy, their tour including Constantinople.1 John Frederick was in Paris by April 1739 and Charles by February 1740.8


John Frederick and Roger Kynaston were sailing round Sicily in May 1749 with Richard Dalton; they encountered Lord Charlemont at Catania and together they sailed to Malta.1 Both Frederick and Kynaston subscribed to James Russel's Letters.
In 1716 Freebairn was the Pretender's printer in Scotland,1 and he subsequently became a Jacobite courier.2 He was in Rome in August (and left in September) 1717 and was in Italy in December 1717;3 he was in Urbino in April and Rome in August 1718,4 Rome in 17195 and Padua in 1721 ('Robertus Fribarnus Scotus').6
Robert Fuebauin Inglese Proteste Pittore 25' was living in the Via Babuino in Rome at Easter 1787.1 In 1790 he was listed in Rome as a landscape painter living in the Casa di Battoni near the Strada Condotta (Rome List 1790). Whaley Armitage visited his studio on 10 March 1791, and thought his landscapes equal to any of de Loutherbourg's,2 and Mrs Flaxman saw him on several occasions between February and March 1791.3 From Rome he exhibited Italian landscapes at the RA 1789-91, and many others were engraved and published in his English and Italian Scenery.4


Freeman's itinerary is taken from his notebook (Freeman notebk.MSS) which contains accounts of painters and architects probably compiled before his departure, and some pen drawings possibly copied from engravings. He visited Padua on 19 December 1744,1 and spent five months in Venice. He was presumably the Mr Freeman who attended a dinner for the Dilettanti given by Lord Holderness on 12 February 1745.2 From March 1745 he spent ten months at the Academy in Turin. Thereafter, having passed the winter in Switzerland, he spent sixteen months travelling in Italy, making two visits each to Rome and Florence.
Strickland Freeman brought a letter from William Poyntz in Turin to John Collet at Genoa in April 1778, and sailed from Genoa to Leghorn early in May.1 He was presented to the Pope on 5 December, and then suffered a coaching accident on his way to Naples in January 1779.2 On 13 February he went with John Soane and Sir George Strickland (who was to become his father-in-law) to Paestum.3 On 18 June he was writing to John Strange from Trieste.4
William Freeman went abroad with a brother (probably Catesby Freeman, apparently his twin). They left England in May 1727 and passed through France and Switzerland to Italy. His journal (Freeman jnl.MSS), written in Italian with some notes in English at the end, tends to be an objective description of places. At an inn outside Susa they met the Pretender, Hay [Col.John Hay?] and the Duke of Wharton, 'but did not know it till we arrived at Turin'. After ten months in Tuscany, (four at Lucca and six in Florence), they came to Rome, where Stosch noticed them on 9 December 1728.1 In the spring of 1729 they made an expedition to Naples; they left Rome on 15 March, for Loreto and Venice.2 After touring the Veneto and Lombardy, they recrossed Mont Cenis to travel in Savoy and Provence.
Freeman is mentioned twice in the Charlemont correspondence: in August 1753 he was neglecting an expedition to Ischia, and in December 1755 he sent (via John Parker) his compliments to Lord Charlemont from Rome, where he had arrived with 'a son of Sir Richard Lloyd' and was about to leave for Turin.1 He was presumably the Freeman who wrote from Rome to the Earl of Essex in March 1753, and who was recovering from 'pains' in Rome that April.2
After spending 'near two years' in Spain as physician to the English forces, Freind went to Rome, 'as well for the sake of seeing the antiquities of that city, as for the pleasure of visiting and conversing with Baglivi and Lancisi, men eminent at that time for their skill in physic'.1 He was at Genoa in the autumn or winter of 1706-7,2 and returned to England in 1707 (DNB). From London he became much involved with Jacobite affairs at the time of the Atterbury plot, the Pretender in Rome professing 'an eternal gratitude' to him (Commons 2, 2:53).













Fulford and his wife were presented to the Grand Duke in Florence at the end of October 17731 and were still in Florence in December, when Lady Mary Coke found that Mrs Fulford was the only other English lady there. Lady Mary became 'very shy' of Mrs Fulford since 'not satisfied with a french Gentleman that is come with her husband and her from Aix, and who most people think her Gallant, seems now inclined to have a Cicisbeo of this Country: I found an Abbé with her the other morning, who seems very much in her Good Graces; upon which I determined to make her no more morning visits'.2

In May 1704 the Duke of Shrewsbury referred to Mr Fuller, a merchant at Leghorn.1 Through the interest of Lord Townshend, he became consul at Leghorn in 1717 (see John Burrows), and he returned to England in 1722,2 having been succeeded as consul by James Harriman in 1721. He was presumably the Fuller of the Leghorn firm of Gould, Harriman & Fuller to whom Thomas Coke made payments in 1717,3 and he may have been the John Fuller of Norfolk in Padua on 18 April 1702.4
John Fuller was one of a 'most agreable Set of Treveling Gentlemen' whom James Byres encountered in Naples on 11 March 1766.1 He was travelling with John Trent and they had been given introductions by Henry Seymour Conway to the British diplomats William Hamilton, Horace Mann, Louis Dutens and John Murray.2 They had arrived in Naples by 28 January 1766, and climbed Vesuvius in March, Fuller then getting a contusion on his leg.3 That same month, with a Mr Hervey, they laid complaints against the insulting behaviour of a porter in the 'locanda di Caserta'.4 On 22 April they arrived in Venice.5

William Artaud mentioned a Mr Fuller 'an English gentleman of small fortune resident at Rome' in October and November 1797, 'a great lover of art, [who] painted a little himself'.1 Artaud once caught him retouching 'his performances after the Professore had gone', but found he 'improved upon me, he is certainly not a man of brilliant parts, but his manner is correct and gentle'.2
Mr Fullthorpe had first arrived in Rome before Jonathan Skelton's death on 19 January 1759, 'but made so short a stay that he did not see [Skelton] & went to Naples'. He had returned to Rome by May when George James showed him some Skelton drawings 'which he seemd please with & regretted his death as he proposed imploying him' (Skelton 1960, 78-9; G. James, 12 May 1759).
On 22 May 1706 Furnese bought pictures worth 2000 scudi from Ficoroni in Rome;1 he exported '10 quadri moderni' and 'un quadro e 4 tavolini et un casse di stam[p]e' on 28 May and in June that year.2 He was in Padua on 27 August 1707 (with John Colebrooke)3 and 'Mr Furnace' was expected in Rome at the beginning of December.4 In November 1707 Magnolfi had written from Florence that Furnese had taken 'a set' [the term is ambivalent and probably refers to prints] of twenty four-heads and three statues by Soldani.4 On the death of Robert's son in 1735, his cousin Henry Furnese acted as a trustee of his estates and, following Henry's death in 1756, a Furnese sale of old masters was held (Prestage, 1 Feb. 1758), which included outstanding pictures by Sacchi and Guido Reni (both bought by Lord Spencer) and Maratti.5
Fuseli was nearly thirty when he went to Italy. He had already translated into English Winckelmann's Painting and Sculpture of the Greeks, and was compiling a history of German verse; he was, as Lavater observed, 'an original; His look is lightning, his word a thunderstorm'.1 In 1768 Joshua Reynolds had encouraged him to take up painting and, with the help of the banker Coutts and Dr John Armstrong, Fuseli eventually set out for Italy in the spring of 1770. Armstrong sailed with him to Genoa, though their friendship was said not to have survived the voyage.2 Fuseli passed through Milan and Florence,3 before arriving in Rome in May 1770 (Dr Armstrong was then still with him).4 He remained there some eight years, and his recorded excursions were few. In 1772 he convalesced in Venice from a fever which left him white haired and with trembling hands; in 1775 he visited Naples, Herculaneum and Pompeii, and, apparently in 1776, he visited Turin with Allan Ramsay to view the work of 'a learned but uninspired' (and unnamed) painter.5 At Rome Fuseli lived some time in the Via Babuino (see C.H. Tatham) and in 1777 he was listed in the Strada Felice with John Rouby.6 He at once changed the spelling of his name (Füssli) to the Italianate Fuseli and embarked upon a series of strongly imaginative pictures, calculated to overturn 'the tripod from which Winckelmann, Lessing and Mengs promulgated their false and frigid oracles'.7 While continuing to study the living model, Fuseli looked at mannerist works by Parmigianino, Rosso and Bandinelli, but above all it was the work of Michelangelo in the Sistine Chapel that provided his inspiration. In 1773 Thomas Banks described him as cutting 'the greatest figure' among the 'students in Painting': 'last season he had pictures bespoke to the amount of 1300 l., good encouragement for a student, yet nothing more than, from his great abilities, he is justly entitled to'.8 He became the centre of an international group of painters and sculptors in Rome, his adherents including John Brown, Banks, Barry, Northcote and Alexander Runciman, and the Scandinavians Sergel and Abildgaard. Fuseli took his subjects from Dante, Shakespeare, Homer and Greek tragedy (he was at the same time teaching himself classical Greek). In 1774 Father Thorpe had noticed him preparing to paint several scenes from Shakespeare, commenting that 'his imagination is fiery & excellent in what is terrible'.9 That year Fuseli sent for exhibition at the RA a drawing of The Death of Cardinal Beaufort, and in 1777 he showed a painting of Macbeth. At the end of his stay in Rome he was contemplating the decoration of a room with frescoes from Shakespeare, in imitation of the Sistine Chapel. Fuseli left Rome in 1778 and in September was in Bologna,10 admiring the cloister of S.Michele in Bosco. He proceeded through Parma and Mantua, where he was much impressed by 'the contradictory character' of Giulio Romano in the Palazzo del Te, and left Italy through Milan. He spent some time in Zurich, before returning to London in 1779. His Caricature of the Artist leaving Italy (Zurich) shows a nude antique hero defecating on Switzerland, while three mice, identified as Humphry, Romney and West, scuttle over England. Fuseli was elected to the Accademia di S.Luca in 1816.


Lord Gage's son' was expected in Rome in January 1739 and was still there in September.1 By January 1740 he was in Turin.2

Having quitted the service of England, contrary to the wishes of his father, he had come to Florence', wrote Dutens; young, and 'extremely well made', he secretly married Madame Orlandini, a lady 'born of Irish parents, of the family of the Duke of Ormond. Her father had been a General in the service of the House of Austria, and had married her to General Orlandini' [probably Ipolito Gaspero del Beccuto Orlandini, c.1696-1771].1 In September 1777 Horace Mann had mentioned a 'Mr Cahagan, an Irish gentleman of good family', who had held a commission in the army in the regiment in which his brother actually serves'.2 In December 1780 they helped the Countess of Albany escape from her husband, the Young Pretender, to a Florentine convent.2 Gahagan, with Madame Orlandini and their daughter, was seen several times in Florence by John Ramsay between 12 October 1783 and 1 May 1784.3
Father Thorpe described Gahagan as 'An Irish Trinitarian Friar, who was principal man in the Convent of his Order in the Via Condotti'.1 Mengs had admired his head and the Friar agreed to sit on condition that Mengs did not paint him in his habit. Mengs finished the head and Maron completed the drapery. Gahagan was afterwards sent to a house of his Order at Naples, the Friars suspecting that he had come 'to rejoin their desorders'. He died suddenly, it was reported, by one stroke of apoplexy'; another account of his death 'was more believed, was different & is horrid to relate'.1 The Mengs portrait, which shows him in a red van Dyck costume, was sent to Lord Arundell at Wardour in March 1774 (Christie's, 9 Dec. 1994); another closely related portrait of Gahagan by Mengs is in the Museum Carolino Augusteum, Salzburg.


Elizabeth Galloway arrived in Rome on 1 July 1725 disguised as a man. She sought the Pretender's protection, which was not immediately granted, but her house was filled all day with English Jacobites, said Stosch. On 21 July he wrote that Madame Galloway was 'leading the life of an adventuress' (SP 85/15; Walton, 1, 21 Jul. 1725).
A Jacobite, who also called himself Gardner, he was arrested at Camerino and imprisoned in Rome in July 1725 for passing false lettres de change on the Roman banker Belloni. In August he secured his release, pending trial, by making a deposit of money. Stosch did not connect him with Elizabeth Galloway (SP 85/15, ff.410, 423; 21 Jul., 18 Aug. 1725).
Margherita Galli Scote - Cattolica Romana - 40' was living on the Strada di S.Isidoro in 1776 with her son 'Giuseppe Stuard'; they were living near the Porta Pinciana in 1777, when her son's age was given as 13, and she was living alone near S.Isidoro in 1779 (AVR sa, S.Andrea delle Fratte).



Gandy went to Italy under the patronage of his father's employer, John Martindale, the proprietor of White's Club in St James's, and he described his subsequent experiences in a series of letters to his parents (Gandy letters mss). Travelling by sea, Gandy spent nine days at Gibraltar and narrowly avoided capture near Corsica by the French fleet, itself being pursued by Lord Hood. To make matters worse, Gandy's ship was lacking in fresh provisions and the captain died during the voyage, necessitating a period of quarantine on arrival at Leghorn. Gandy's travelling companion was Henry Holland's pupil and agent Charles Heathcote Tatham, but upon their arrival at Rome the two men took separate lodgings, Gandy's being in the Piazza Barberini. He was immediately in contact with Thomas Jenkins, but Richard Westmacott, whom he evidently knew in advance, was absent from Rome.During the summer of 1794 Gandy worked to improve his Italian and studied as many buildings as possible. Despite the threat of French invasion, he managed to visit Tivoli and Albano in the autumn, and in the spring of 1795 he made an excursion to Cori via Velletri with the landscape painter G.A. Wallis. As early as October 1794 he had begun to prepare drawings for the 1795 Concorso Clementino at the Accademia di S.Luca.1 The prova was held on 27 May 1795 and Gandy was awarded a special prize in the first class 'in view of the merit of his [sepulchral chapel] design but without placing it among the other first class designs because it had departed from the specified subject'. Gandy claimed that, despite the support of Guy Head, he had been denied the first prize through the intervention of another of the professors, Giuseppe Barberi, whose son Paolo Emilio was a competitor (but in fact for the second class in architecture). He refused to accept any medal unless it was of equal worth to the first premium, and considered that these events had worked to his advantage, since they caused a stir in Rome and consequently advanced his reputation. Gandy reported receiving four silver medals at a ceremony in the salone of the Capitoline Palace on 2 June 1795 before Prince Augustus (himself just elected Honorary Academician) and his retinue, six cardinals and 'an infinite number of prelates, princes and knights, both Roman and foreign'. At the same time Richard Westmacott was awarded the first class first prize in sculpture. Despite Gandy's success in the Concorso, his ambition remained relatively modest and he wrote of his aspiration to the surveyorship of some London parish or, on other occasions, to work in Corsica or America. His letters otherwise chronicled the political turbulence of the times. The inflation of prices may have been one reason why projected visits to Naples and to Pisa and Florence in the summer of 1795 did not take place. Lack of money certainly hindered Gandy's studies in Rome itself, preventing him from raising scaffolds to obtain measurements of antique monuments. He was able, however, to visit Palestrina, Frascati, Marino, and Ariccia by foot, again travelling with Wallis, and in late November he made an excursion through the Abruzzi, during which he met Westmacott and Mr Disney (see Disney-Ffytche). Back in Rome early in 1796, Gandy began to receive commissions: a chimneypiece design for John Deare and drawings in the 'Gothic manner' for Sir Godfrey Webster. Demands on his time obliged Gandy to engage an Italian draughtsman to assist him. Between March and May 1796 Gandy visited Naples with 'Disney'. Sir William Hamilton obtained permission for Gandy to draw in the Naples area on 1 April.2 Arriving back in Rome in May, Gandy found the city in turmoil as the French had occupied Piacenza and were proceeding south. Prince Augustus had made plans to evacuate English artists to Corsica, but in the event Gandy reported that most of the English in Rome departed without warning in June leaving the poorer artists behind. In August the French commissioners arrived at Rome to remove 100 statues and 100 pictures, according to Gandy. He considered that Paris rather than Rome would become the fine arts emporium of the world, but pointed out that the Pantheon and the Colosseum could not be so easily translated. Late in September Gandy moved from the Piazza Barberini, first to Strada Gregoriana and then to the Caffe Inglese, evidently because his landlord of two years had robbed him of 200 crowns. In October he was assaulted on the Spanish Steps, the attacker fleeing only after mistaking Gandy's house key for a pistol. Then, in January 1797, Gandy learned that his patron Martindale had become bankrupt, at a time when Gandy was embroiled in a law suit with Deare (whom he suspected of cheating him over his chimneypiece designs) and had also spent a substantial sum on two paintings said to be by Poussin which he hoped to sell in England to repay the expenses he had incurred in Italy. By March, the French had occupied Rome and Gandy found himself sharing lodgings with five French officers who, despite his fears, treated him with civility. In June 1797 William Ottley endorsed a credit note to Gandy for £50, enabling him finally to escape from Rome.3 Meanwhile his two Poussin paintings had been yielded to the banker to whom he had presented the uncashable bills drawn on Martindale. In a letter of 4 March 1797 Gandy had drawn up an inventory of his possessions: 24 books on architecture, 154 Piranesi prints, 300 studies and architectural drawings, and 30 sketchbooks of architecture and memorandums. Perhaps much was sold in Rome, since transport would have been difficult and since very few drawings can now be located (six in the RIBA, of which five are dated 1796; one in the YCBA, and five in priv. colls.). It has also been suggested that Gandy sold his medals of the Accademia di S.Luca,4 though his correspondence indicates that the medals were being carried to London by Westmacott in the summer of 1796. What is certain is that having left Rome in May 1797 with no clear idea of how to get home, Gandy was fortunate enough to meet a friendly King's Messenger at Florence, a Mr Hunt, who brought him back to London with relative ease.

On the death of his elder brother in 1785 Lord Gardenstone succeeded to a large fortune, and the following year, 'being in easy circumstances, but in a declining state of health', he travelled abroad at the age of sixty-five. He spent over a year in France, Switzerland and Germany, before entering Italy in September 1787. His itinerary and his forthright reflections on his travels were published in his Travelling Memorandums (the third and last volume of which was published posthumously).He reached Rome bristling with prejudice. 'How can men of free thoughts, humanity, and British spirit expect to be happy, or even altogether at their ease in Rome', he wondered, 'the seat of slavery and priestcraft, erected on the monumental ruins of very ancient liberty, grandeur and empire. The fine arts ... were wholly subservient to the vile arts of superstition and tyranny', and the best artists in Rome were now foreigners. After three days he went for a month to Naples, where he confided that 'being an old man, I have felt a sensible pleasure ... in seeing several young heirs to distinguished British families, who by their sense and good manners, do credit to themselves and honour to their country'. Talane acted as his antiquarian and as his agent for the purchase of 'certain articles of Natural History'. He returned to Rome where Thomas Jenkins, 'a man of extraordinary talents and taste', was most attentive, presenting him with 'several fine pieces of polished lava for my cabinet [and] I have not seen any thing at Rome with greater pleasure than his collection of antique cameos set in rings'. At the end of March he left for Venice, where he arrived on 12 April and stayed for eight days.Although his chief concern abroad was the collection of specimens for his cabinet of natural history, he nevertheless commissioned a number of copies of pictures in Italy. In Florence miniatures by Tomaso Nistri of works by Titian, Guido Reni, Giorgione and Raphael; in Naples copies by Nicolo Passeri, James Clark (from Guercino, Guido Reni, Raphael, Rubens and Van Dyck) and the miniaturist John Taylor (Correggio and ten subjects of his choice); in Rome copies by Guy Head (from Guercino and Netscher) and Skirving (from Correggio). Skirving was also asked to 'draw a miniature painting for me of the worthy and ingenious painter Mr Gavin Hamilton'. Gardenstone admired Durno, particularly his Falstaff interviewing his recruits.He evaluated several guide books: Keyssler was 'heavy, tedious, trivial', Dr John Moore 'expatiates too much', and Bishop Burnet was 'much too laborious in search of old manuscripts, and in discussing trivial points of ecclesiastical controversy'. The best guide was his 'old testy, but sensible and agreeable friend Smollet', whose volume he intended his own Memorandums would both supplement and correct.


Luke Gardiner and his brother William toured Italy in 1770-1. They were presumably 'i Gardiner' who met Giuseppe Baretti in Genoa in September 1770 and were introduced by him to the Doge.1 They were certainly in Florence on 15 December 1770, and a Mr Gardiner was listed there on 26 January and 28 June 1771.2 A Mr Gardiner arrived in Venice on 8 May 1771.3 By October the Gardiner brothers had been introduced by Horace Mann to Cardinal Albani in Rome,4 where Luke Gardiner commissioned from Gavin Hamilton the great history piece, Priam pleading with Achilles for the body of Hector (lost; engraved by Cunego in 1775). The brothers were last recorded in Italy at Capua on 23 November 1771, presumably on their way to Naples.5 Patrick Home met them in Italy and noted 'Two Mr. Gardners - Irish - good lads - large estate - g. father a footman'.6
Gardiner, 'a sponger and a cad', alleged his father was Robert Walpole, the Prime Minister's oldest son.1 He had campaigned under General Wade in Flanders in 1744, and in September that year he arrived in Leghorn aboard the frigate Revenge. Horace Mann tried to facilitate his request for promotion to lieutenant and told Horace Walpole (Gardiner's alleged brother) that he was 'vastly esteemed in the fleet'; Horace Walpole, however, explained that Gardiner was not Robert's son,2 and no more is heard of Gardiner in Italy.

Gardner drove the Flaxmans round Rome in his coach in December 1787 and accompanied them to Naples the following month (alarming Mrs Flaxman by losing his temper with an innkeeper).1 Writing from Rome on 2 April 1788 Flaxman informed his parents that he was sending his letter by Gardner, 'who is returning, & to whom we were much obliged for his kindness in Rome and Naples'.2





A Jacobite, Lord Garlies was in Rome in June 1716,1 and on 31 October he was reported to be in Turin, staying 'some weeks'. He was then described as 'a mighty pretty gentleman, and entirely loyal [to the Stuarts]. If ever the occasion offer, will venture his life and fortune in his Majesty's service'.2 He was in Padua on 8 January 1717.3
Described by Boswell as being a little man of 'a petulant forwardness that cannot fail to disgust people of sense and delicacy',1 Lord Garlies was in Rome by April 1758,2 when Robert Mylne was teaching him the principles of architecture.3 He sat to Mengs for a portrait dated 1758 (priv. coll.) and commissioned a copy of Titian's Venus and Adonis in the Colonna Palace from James Nevay.4 In or after August 1758 he was in Turin with his governor, a Mr Smith, on his way home5 when he unrolled his Mengs portrait to show it off, but when it was repacked some paper stuck to it, as Robert Strange later discovered.6
Garmston wrote to Lord Macartney from Naples on 27 November 1787 saying he had left England 'almost half a Year, and about half the time I mean to continue abroad'; he made brief mention of towns he had visited and revealed that he was forty five years old; he had visited the museums at Portici and Capo di Monte with a Mr Price (PRO NI, d5762/9/20).
The friend of Garrick, Hogarth and David Hume, Dr Garnier was in Padua on 19 December 1744,1 and in February 1745 he attended a dinner in Venice given by Lord Holderness in honour of the Society of Dilettanti.2 His sister Mary lived in Venice with her husband John Truesdale.3 On 8 May 1745 he was given a doctorate by the University of Padua.4 His only recorded acquisition in Italy was a papal indulgence permitting him and his descendants for ever to eat meat during Lent, bought for £2 as a curiosity.3
Garrick and his wife set out to spend a winter abroad in September 1763, but their tour lasted two years.1 Garrick was forty-five and famous, and he was treated with respect and admiration throughout his tour. They travelled in some style in their own carriage and their pleasure was only marred by Mrs Garrick's recurring arthritis. In October they reached Turin, which Garrick thought 'a good Place for two Days but for a Week 'tis not sufficient'. He was amazed by the Opera, where the audience talked loudly throughout the performance and the players, when not otherwise occupied, conversed with their friends in the audience. In Milan they stayed at the Tre Re and were attended by the Governor of Lombardy, Count Karl Joseph von Firmian, for whom Garrick ordered from England 'all ye Prints of myself that have any Character'. They sailed from Genoa to Leghorn, where they stayed three days and were well entertained by the English merchants, before they went on to Florence. There Algarotti, 'my dear Swan of Padua', furnished Garrick with introductions in Bologna and Venice. By 16 November they were in Florence and on the 20th they were dining with Horace Mann, whom Walpole had warned Garrick 'will make you laugh as a mimic ... but be a little on your guard, remember he is an actor'.2 He also looked up the house where the dramatist George Colman, son of the diplomat Francis Colman, was born. Garrick's first impression of Rome, where they spent two weeks in December, was disappointing. He had long anticipated seeing the city where 'the great Roscius exerted those talents which rendered him the wonder of his age', but he was oppressed by the dirt and thought the Tiber 'pitiful'; but all changed after he had seen 'that glorious Structure' the Pantheon and the Colosseum. He met the Dance brothers, Nathaniel and George, to whom he had an introduction from their much older brother James [Dance] Love of the Drury Lane theatre, and found them 'both very ingenious and agreeable men'. The Garricks reached Naples on 17 December. Garrick met Lady Orford and Lord and Lady Spencer and he attended 'balls more than twice a Week & parties innumerable'; they visited the sights and saw the King's actors give an ex tempore performance in the dazzling San Carlo theatre. 'In Short', wrote Garrick, 'we are in great fashion & I have forgot England & all my trumpery at Drury Lane'. He sat to Angelica Kauffman (Burghley) and engaged Antonio Carrara of Padua as a valet, taking him back to England with him. The end of their stay in Naples was marred by the tragic effects of famine in the city, and by Mrs Garrick's health. They returned to Rome late in February. Garrick sat to Nathaniel Dance (untraced) and Batoni (Clark/Bowron 266; Ashmolean), see Richard Kaye. In May James Martin saw both portraits in Rome; the Dance he thought 'somewhat too grave', but the Batoni a strong likeness.3 In April Garrick had exchanged the Batoni for a cameo belonging to Richard Kaye, who was then in Rome. Having recognised Nollekens in the street in Rome, Garrick sat to him for a marble bust (Althorp). He was 'antiquity hunting from morning till night', and for the 5th Duke of Devonshire he bought Bartolozzi prints. From Rome they went in May to Parma where the Duke of York was being feted. Garrick performed the dagger scene from Macbeth before the young Duke and the Duke of Parma (who presented him with an enamelled gold box), his performance apparently painted by Alessandro Longhi (Lady Lever AG).4 They went on to Venice, where the Duke of York was also staying. Garrick saw the Regatta which 'appeared to be a dream or a fairy-tale realiz'd'; 'I am grown fat', he added, 'and sleep half the day in a gondola'. He was amused by the Courts of Justice which he thought excelled the Italian Comedy. Advised by Giuseppe Baretti, he bought some 180 Italian books with the intention of selling them to Topham Beauclerk, and he helped the painter Richard Brompton with a loan of £80, see Brompton.Mrs Garrick meanwhile became seriously indisposed in Venice and in mid-July they went to the hot mud baths at Abano near Padua. There she improved, and Garrick became 'in treaty for no less than two Pictures by Tempesto, two Bassans, a Vandyke, a Rubens, a Paul Veronese, &c. I have a little money to throw away', he wrote, 'and I don't see why I should not be a little ridiculous as well as my betters'. Their return journey across Germany and France was delayed by Garrick's illness in Munich, and they stayed in Paris from November 1764 to April 1765.

Intended for a career in diplomacy, Garthshore had already spent three summers abroad and could speak French and German when he became tutor to the Earl of Dalkeith. They first travelled in northern Europe, and in The Hague it was reported that Garthshore's modesty bordered on reserve, but he was an excellent character, his only difficulty being that he wished to be regarded as 'the friend and not the governor' of Lord Dalkeith.1 On his return, Garthshore declined payment from Dalkeith's father, the 3rd Duke of Buccleuch, preferring the latter's patronage for his diplomatic career (which was not entirely successful).
Edmund Garvey first visited Italy when young and returned to live in England. His RA Diploma Work, A View of Rome (1783), of which he produced a number of versions, may possibly have been executed during this first visit. Garvey was not highly regarded as a painter, Pasquin alleging that he was 'a Royal Academician whose qualifications are, if possible, more doubtful than any of his compeers' (Strickland).On his second visit to Italy, Garvey was recorded in Rome by Mrs Flaxman in March 1792.1 In 1793 he was described as a landscape painter at the 'Strada Gregoriana, in Casa Rosa', where Henry Howard was also lodged (Rome List); he was also said to have stayed at the Palazzo Zuccari.2
A Catholic, Edward Gascoigne travelled abroad in 1724, soon after succeeding his father as the 6th Baronet. He was accompanied by a physician, Henry Bostock, and a French master, Mr Warren, and his itinerary is contained in a partially published travel journal (Gascoigne jnl.mss).1 On 22 February 1725 they were in Padua (where Bostock was listed as Richard)2 and on 17 March Stosch reported the arrival of 'Mr Edward Gascoigne, RC, with Dr Bostoc' in Rome.3 On 27 March he visited Castel S.Angelo with Rawlinson,4 and on 18 April Gascoigne began a course of instruction in the rudiments of design 'wth ye Architect master'; the following day he began another course under the antiquarian Palazzi accompanied by Sir Francis Head, Thomas Mostyn and a Mr Dalton.5 His portrait (at Lotherton), which includes a view of the Colosseum, is attributed to Francesco Trevisani. From Rome he went to Naples and then sailed to Leghorn; he was in Florence in November6 and Milan in December, spending some days in Cremona. In January 1726 he was in Bologna. Gascoigne was said to have 'laid out a great deal of money in Virtu';7 he bought pictures, some marbles (including a 'Cicero's Head') and a collection of Imperial and Consular coins in Rome from Count Furrieri; he also paid for an engraved plate in A.F. Gori's Inscriptiones and bought prints in Cremona. His principal patronage was given to the Florentine architect Alessandro Galilei in the summer of 1725; he commissioned designs for a new house and a pavement for the family chapel (neither of which was used), two chimneypieces and four table tops of red and yellow marble, and a monument to his parents,8 which was erected in 1729 in All Saints, Barwick-in-Elmet (pulled down in 1858).
A Catholic (until 1780), Sir Thomas first went to Italy in 1764, attending the Academy in Turin in August and September.1 While there he indulged in a spectacular act of truancy with Charles Dillon; they went to hunt at Rivoli and Susa and then, hearing that Lord Abingdon intended to hunt on Mont Cenis, they went on to Geneva; they then decided to pay a brief visit to Paris, informing their tutors they would return in a few days.2 In February-March 1765 Gascoigne was in Rome with John and George Damer and was involved in a fracas in which a coachman died; William Hamilton told Horace Mann that it was 'ungenerous' of Gascoigne to blame Damer when it was said that he 'was the first mover of the whole'.3 Gascoigne alleged he was not present when the fatal blow was struck, 'but was gone home for his pistols, which he discharged among the people but perceiving they were without balls, otherwise the mischief must have been much greater'. It was lucky, as Mann commented, 'that the offended were of a rank to be quieted by money, but above all it was lucky for our countrymen that the Governor [Piccolomini] so zealously assisted them'.4 On 22 March Gascoigne had arrived in Florence.4 On his return to England he became a member of Gibbon's Roman Club.5 Gascoigne returned to Italy late in 1776, having left England the previous year. He joined his fellow Catholic and near neighbour Henry Swinburne in Bordeaux in the summer of 1775 and took him to Spain in 1776. In December they sailed with Mrs Swinburne to Naples. Gascoigne spent much of his time with Swinburne in the ensuing year exploring the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, see Swinburne. At the end of their first stay in Naples Gascoigne had amused the King by appearing at a masked ball en femme de chambre,6 but he had not always been in such good spirits, Father Thorpe alleging that during an illness in Naples he had made his will.7 They were in Rome in March 1778, and in July Gascoigne left the Swinburnes to go with the Abbé Grant to Milan, expecting to return to Rome in October.7 They were still in Milan on 19 August but had reached Florence in September.8 Gascoigne was reunited with the Swinburnes in Rome by 11 November 1778,9 but 'about' January 1779 he was on his own at Naples discussing with Thomas Jones the possibility of making copies of the Altieri Claudes. Jones described a curious conversation concerning artists' materials, in which Gascoigne upheld Philipp Hackert's practice of bleaching his canvases 'half a year' in the sun and making his own colours from minerals; the discusssion ended as Lord Tylney called Gascoigne away, but that evening Gascoigne told Jones he would hear from him, and there the matter stayed.10 Gascoigne was back in Rome in February, when he gave Swinburne the Petroni collection of medals bought for him in Naples.11 That same month Swinburne gave Gascoigne Thomas Banks's Alcyone and Ceyx (Lotherton) which he had won in a raffle organised by Lady Catherine Beauclerk, see Thomas Banks. Early in March 1779 Swinburne and Gascoigne made a brief excursion in the Abruzzi, before Gascoigne left Rome on 17 April to return to England.12 He was in Florence on 15 May, when Mann reported that he was 'setting out tomorrow for England', bringing Horace Walpole a medal (which was acknowledged on 11 July).13 Gascoigne was presumably returning with Swinburne (who left his wife and children in Naples to pay a six-month visit to England), who also arrived in London by July.At Rome Gascoigne had sat for his bust to Hewetson, and for a full-length portrait dated 1779 by Batoni (Clark/Bowron 416); both are now at Lotherton Hall, together with the busts of Mr and Mrs Swinburne. Most of the works of art acquired by Gascoigne while he was abroad passed to Leeds City Art Galleries in 1968 with Lotherton Hall (the family home from the nineteenth century).
Mr and Miss Gascoyne were frequently with Sarah Bentham in Florence in March 1794. On 17 March they said they intended to go 'in a few Days to Rome & from thence to Naples & to continue in Italy one year longer as they left England only in Jany last'. From 26 to 29 March they stayed in Leghorn at the same hotel as Sarah Bentham who also recorded meeting there 'Mr Birt whose Brother (the Minister of Twickenham) had Married a Daughter of Mr Gascoyne' (see Burt); the Gascoynes left Leghorn intending to go via Siena to Rome.1 On 15 February 1795 Charles Tatham in Rome said he had 'lately had some chance of going to Naples with a Mr and Miss Gascoyne' and Mr and Mrs John Holland.2 The Gascoynes (variously described as 'Mr Gascogne con Moglie' and 'G. Gascogne con Figlia') stayed in Venice from 1 to 9 May, when they left for England.3
He was probably also the 'Mr Gaugin' who, with Edward Wortley Montagu (1678-1761), 'sealed their pictures' in Rome on 15 April 1704 (Shrewsbury Jnl.).
Mr Gaven about 30 years old a merchant from Dublin' arrived in Rome in August 1731; 'he has applyed to ye P[retend]ers Court for to have procured for Him from ye Pope a Patent for to have all ye priviledges of a Crown Consull (except ye Caractere) in the Pap[al] state'.1 Since his father owned eight ships it was thought the son might attract trade to Civitavecchia from Leghorn, but he was not a Catholic and Thomas Chamberlain was appointed, initially on the understanding that Gaven would take the profits, see Chamberlain. By 17 January 1732 Gaven had left Rome for 'England or Ireland'.2 By 1744 Gaven was on good terms with Cardinal Albani, implying he had already spent some time in Rome. That year he was sent from Rome by Albani and Count de Thun as an envoy extraordinary to Admiral Thomas Mathews in the Mediterranean, to seek help from the British fleet for the Queen of Hungary. In 1745 Gaven was in Venice acting as Maria Theresa's agent to the British fleet, while Albani was seeing his wife and daughter in Rome.3 Gaven's later activity as a dealer in works of art seems to have been in London, Vienna and Dresden;4 he remained in correspondence with Albani until 1762.

Possibly the 'Gay' who had been at Venice on 23 December 1794 (ASV is 772).
One of the four Jacobite officers, the others being Charles Wogan, John Misset and Luke O'Toole, who brought the Princess Clementina Sobieska from Innsbruck to Italy in April 1719 (Tayler 1938, 212, and 1941, 279).


Major Geddes was in Leghorn in October 1727 for the British Factory's celebrations of George II's coronation.1 After spending several months in Rome he left with John Mills in February 1728, intending to return to England via Venice.2 On 27 March they were in Padua.3


Gell was in Padua on 19 December 1744,1 and attended Lord Holderness's dinner for the Society of Dilettanti in Venice in February 1745.2 He was probably the 'Mr Jell' who arrived in Naples in November 1746,3 and the 'M. Geill anglois' who commissioned two paintings from Vernet in Rome in January 1747.4
Lady Gerard arrived in Turin on 13 October 1724 in mysterious circumstances, 'attended by an Ancient gentleman & a handsome retinue. She keeps herself conceal'd and does not declare her True name; that she uses is Plummer and the gentleman goes by that of Richardson'; within a week, however, her identity had been discovered.1 Early in December she arrived in Rome, from Bologna and Florence; Stosch noted that, as a Catholic, she was being visited by Jacobites and English and Irish monks.2 She remained in Rome over a year. On 4 May 1726 she arrived in Leghorn from Rome3 and on 26 May she was in Padua.4 The Richard Richardson who was in Padua the following day5 may conceivably have been the 'ancient gentleman' with her in Turin.




Elizabeth Gibbes visited Italy with her parents and her sister, Agnes. She kept a lively diary of the first fourteen months of their tour (Gibbes jnl.mss) during which they travelled from Venice to Rome and Naples and returned north to Florence. Like most British travellers, she enjoyed the company of her compatriots and was uncomfortable with unfamiliar Italian usages. At the opera in Venice she had never seen 'such quizzes' as the 'women in the boxes', and she remarked on Venetian women wearing a man's three-cornered hat 'at the back of a full-dressed head'. They encountered difficulty with a customs official at Imola who wished unnecessarily to search their baggage, but he was manhandled by 'the common people'. At Rome she was first dissatisfied with the dirt in their hotel, the Villa di Londra, and disappointed with the Piazza di Spagna; nor was she gratified to hear that 30,000 murders had been committed in the Papal dominions during the first thirteen years of the present Pope's reign. But their life soon developed into a social whirl; a ball given by the Princess Santa Croce ('no negus, no supper, but ices and iced lemonade'), a conversazione given by Cardinal de Bernis, and further masquerades and assemblies. She observed the fidgety Prince of Brunswick, who asked questions 'without waiting for an answer & [was] continually in motion'. Their sight-seeing was conducted by both James Byres and Kenelm Digby, but that did not prevent her dining with Thomas Jenkins or receiving his niece. In Rome in February she gave two sittings for her portrait, but made no mention of the artist; on 24 March she went to see 'Mde le Brun's [Vigée Lebrun's] picture, which is charming', conceivably her portrait. In Naples in March they had found the 'magnificent' San Carlo theatre cold and half empty, and adjourned to Lady Elcho's; Talleyrand was among her companions on an ascent of Mount Vesuvius. Returned to Rome they visited the studios of many artists-Deare, Durno, Flaxman, Gavin Hamilton, Guy Head, Jacob More, Tofanelli and Ducros. On 28 March she observed cricket being played in the Borghese gardens after Church. Their stay in Florence in the summer of 1790 was also lively. The British minister, John, Lord Hervey, performed 'the honours of his court with great eclat', and she was able to observe the 4th Earl of Bristol, 'a very comical little man'. On 3 July they went to the hospital 'to see the mad people. My Father so distressed, I was oblig'ed to quit it without seeing anything to signify'. There were popular protests in June concerning food prices, with processions carrying 'a dead Child with its face uncovered, which tho' a common practice in Italy, has for some time been forbidden in Tuscany by the G[rand] D[uke]'. Elizabeth's journal ends at Pisa on 22 October 1790, but one of her last entries shows they intended to return home via Nice. They were still in Pisa on 2 December (Brand letters mss c, 2 Dec. 1790).


No British traveller's visit to Italy in the eighteenth century was of greater consequence than Gibbon's, and none was more thoroughly prepared. At twenty-seven he had already lived five years in Lausanne and published his Essai sur l'Etude de la Littérature [1761], and immediately before his visit he had read ancient and modern histories, prepared a table of roads and distances, filled a notebook with remarks on geography, and studied Spanheim's treatise on ancient medals and coins.1He travelled with William Guise, whom he had met in Lausanne.2 They entered Italy via Mont Cenis and came first to Turin, where Gibbon was introduced to the King, Charles Emmanuel III. He was struck by the Borromean Islands, 'a work of the fairies in the midst of a lake encompassed by mountains'. In Genoa he noticed the memorials to the recent deliverance from 'Austrian Tyranny', and he inspected 'every scene of action within the enclosure of her double walls'. They had intended to sail from Genoa to Lerici, but conditions were against them and they went to Florence by road. Much of the Farnese and Este collections had been removed from Parma and Modena to Naples and Dresden, but the 'precious relics' which remained detained him. He spent four months in Florence, visiting the Uffizi fourteen times. The Venus de Milo he had known 'ever since my cradle: books, conversations, engravings, copies had been placed before my eyes a thousand times'; but he found the Uffizi statues restored and largely of indifferent quality: accordingly 'the writer is always afraid of building whole systems based on the caprice of some modern sculptor'. While he sought to understand 'the progress and decadence of the arts', he remained sceptical concerning their value for the historian.3 On 13 July he commissioned a drawing of an Egyptian statue for his friend Joseph Needham, and on 6 August he visited Thomas Patch with Guise.4 He studied the Tuscan classics, 'but the shortness of my time, and the use of the French language, prevented my acquiring the facility of speaking'; he was a silent spectator at the conversazioni of Horace Mann. In Pisa he met his cousin John Acton and his nephew, John Francis Edward Acton. Gibbon reached Rome early in October, and twenty-five years later he could still recall the strong emotions which then agitated his mind; after a sleepless night 'I trod, with a lofty step, the ruins of the Forum; each memorable spot where Romulus stood, or Tully spoke, or Caesar fell'. He told his father that 'whatever idea books may have given us of the greatness of that people their accounts of the most flourishing state of Rome fall infinitely short of the picture of its ruins'.5 On 5/6 October Gibbon and Guise, with William Ponsonby, submitted to a course from James Byres, to find that 'in the daily labour of eighteen weeks [apparently an error for eight] the powers of attention were somewhat fatigued'. Six weeks were then spent in Naples, 'whose luxurious inhabitants seem to dwell on the confines of paradise and hell-fire'; later he commented on the Neapolitan 'mixture of pride, vice, slavery and poverty'.6 Gibbon was presented to the young King Ferdinand by William Hamilton, whose antiquarian and geological studies he admired. He returned through Rome, without kissing the Pope's foot, via Loreto and Ferrara to Venice, which afforded 'some hours of astonishment' but, he told his mother, it was the least satisfactory of all Italian cities; singular objects soon gave way 'to satiety and disgust', while the Piazza S.Marco was decorated 'with the worst Architecture I ever yet saw'.7 The University of Padua he pronounced 'a dying taper'.Gibbon later reflected in his Autobiography on the use of foreign travel. 'With the education of boys, where or how they may pass over some juvenile years with the least mischief to themselves or others, I have no concern', he wrote, but the ideal traveller should have age, judgment, 'a competent knowledge of men and books, ... freedom from domestic prejudices' and an 'indefatigable vigour of mind and body'. Gibbon possessed all these attributes: 'it was at Rome, on 15 October 1764, as I sat musing amidst the ruins of the Capitol, while the barefooted friars were singing vespers in the temple of Jupiter, that the idea of writing the decline and fall of the city first started to my mind'.

Being of a rambling disposition', Gibbs went abroad c.1700, staying some time in Holland, and travelling through France (which as a Catholic he was privileged to do in a time of hostilities). He appears to have made some study of architecture before he reached Italy.1 On 12 October 1703 he registered as a pupil in the Scots College in Rome to train as a priest,2 but he was intimidated by the Rector's rudeness and left at the end of August 1704, without taking his vows. He resolved to stay in Rome and apply himself to painting. His genius for drawing soon led him to architecture which he studied under Carlo Fontana, then sixty-six years old, and P.F. Garroli, both of whom held office in the Accademia di S.Luca (but Gibbs's name does not appear in the Academy records). Later, in 1717, Gibbs told Lord Mar that his old masters in Rome, Fontana and 'Signor Abramo Paris', were both dead.3 In 1706 Gibbs was living near the Piazza di Spagna in the Strada Paolina.4 It is not clear how he supported himself, but his 'Cursory Remarks' ('memorandums for his own use') on modern buildings and antiquities in Rome,5 suggest he acted as a cicerone and with an eye to future patronage. In 1707 he met Sir John Perceval and he probably instructed one of the Blathwayt brothers. In October that year Perceval, back in England, expressed the hope that 'Mr Gibbs finds scholars to his mind'.6 But Gibbs replied on 3 December that 'things go so ill here, and there is such a pack of us, and so jealous of one another, that the one would see the other hanged'; he intended to make his 'stay as short here as possible', and only his need 'to stay some short time longer to perfectionate myself in this most miserable business of architecture' had prevented him returning home with Perceval, 'though it had been to carry a livery in your service'.7 In 1708 Gibbs heard that his brother William was ill and wished him to return; by November 1708 he was in Scotland, but by then his brother had died.


She was travelling with a Miss Steavens; they were introduced by Horace Mann in Florence to Sir William Hamilton at Naples in a letter dated 4 November 1777,1 and they were in Rome in 'about' March 1778.2


At the age of sixteen Giberne was chosen by Horace Walpole as Horace Mann's gentleman servant in Florence. He arrived in Florence in May 1742, 'very raw but [showing] a disposition to learn'. Mann gave him an Italian master, but Giberne was not at first happy being a servant or with 'a life of writing', and wished to go to sea. He eventually left Mann in August/September 1749, returning home with the sculptor Prince Hoare. 'He is really a very good creature', said Mann, and Giberne talked of returning to Florence to see his master (Wal.Corr., 17:407; 19:83; 20:85-6, 99).


Sampson Gideon inherited a considerable fortune from his father, a celebrated financier (who, being Jewish, was unable to receive a Baronetcy, which was given in 1759 to his thirteen-year-old Protestant son). Sir Sampson was in Turin with a Mr Altman on 12 October 1765, when the British chargé d'affaires Henry Sherdley wrote introducing them to Horace Mann.1 In Rome he sat to Batoni for a portrait dated 1767 (Melbourne; Clark/Bowron 305), although Gideon had married in England in December 1766. The second figure in the portrait is traditionally called Gideon's tutor, 'Signor Basti', but this has been doubted (ibid.). He was conceivably the 'Cavalier Edoardo Gidion' who arrived in Venice on 4 May 1766 with 'Colonello Abram'.2
By 30 January 1782 John Giffard had been 'some weeks in Rome', and by 17 July he had left Rome 'above a fortnight ago. & carried with him no great opinion of the modern Romans'.1 A Catholic, his disagreements with his Protestant mother-in-law concerning the upbringing of his children led him to reside abroad several years in France and Italy (Kirk).
Thomas Giffard travelled in Italy with the Abbé Hook. Sir William Farington met them several times in Italy: in Florence on 27 March, Rome on 3 April, Naples on 24 April and Rome again on 8 May.1 In Rome he sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 320; priv. coll.), the portrait dated 1768 (presumably after his return).
Thomas Giffard went abroad with a tutor Charles Berington, with whom he travelled in France, Italy and Germany. In March 1784 they were in Rome following a course of antiquities under James Byres in a party including John Parkinson, Jonas Brooke, Sir James Graham and Thomas Brand. Brand described them as 'English Catholics & of course ... Bigots'; Berington was 'his tutor Chaplain Priest & even a Doctor of the Sorbonne & of course learned in Baptismal & obstetrical ceremonies. He is a plain sensible good sort of man & would be very well if the boy was not such a bigot'.1 On 10 May they met the Misses Berry at the Villa Madama.2 In Rome Giffard sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 450; priv. coll.) and his bust was carved by Hewetson dated the same year (priv. coll.). They were in Milan in June 1784,3 and had reached Lyons by 14 July.4

He was the unsatisfactory travelling companion of Dr Sylas Neville. After their third fracas Neville wrote in February 1778 'My companion's temper is so disagreeable that it will not be possible for me to go on with him ... he has many peculiarities of the most disagreeable kind'.1 But they apparently stayed together in Rome until Gifford's death in Tivoli on 7 August 1779. According to Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) he 'destroyed himself'.2 He was buried at Leghorn, after Thomas Jenkins had had his body shipped there labelled as a marble statue.1 Part of his journal is in the Norfolk Record Office. See Sylas Neville.


Having already spent some time in Rome, Giles came to Florence by 12 October 1776 bearing an introduction to Horace Mann from Horace Walpole (dated 12 July). He was accompanied by his brother-in-law, Mesmene [possibly Daniel Mesman, d. 1794?] whom Mann would 'have taken for his grandfather'. Giles proposed to leave Florence on 13 October and to be back in England by November (Wal.Corr., 24:243-4, 243 nn1,2).
Dr Gilkes was seen in Venice early in September 1744 by Alexander Drummond.1 He was in Padua on 10 October,2 and on 13 October was received as Doctor in Philosophy and Medicine at the University.3 In February 1745 he attended Lord Holderness's dinner for the Society of Dilettanti in Venice.4 He was again in Padua on 14 May 1746 ('M.D. et Regiae Societatis Londiniensis Socius').5

A Jesuit father at Loreto, he showed the shrine to Sir William Farington in May 1765;1 in May 1771 Mrs Miller published his account, dated Loreto May 1771, of the miracle of Santa Casa.2





She wrote to her widowed sister-in-law [Margaret Glanville] in 1733 urging her to come with the children to Rome: 'you may live far better than in England, and as for your Religion, there is nobody will force you to change for ye citty of Rome is like ye Citty of London or Bristol. Here is all religions in it' (W.U.S. Glanville-Richards, Records of the House of Glanville, 89-90).
John Alexander wrote to the Earl of Mar from Rome on 22 June 1718: 'there is here this year past an Englishwoman, Mrs Mary Ann Glanville', of good character, a Catholic, 'and desirous to live in some monastery' (HMC Stuart, 6:561-2).
Glanville was in Italy with his father-in-law, Thomas Jeffreys; they left Leghorn in January 1734 to go to Civitavecchia and Rome;1 in May they returned to Leghorn and sailed for London.2
On 22 September 1785 Lord Glasgow and 'Mr Livingston' [Philip Livingston?] delivered to John Strange in Venice letters from Lord Bulkeley.1 Glasgow was still in Venice with 'Lord Livingstone' in November 1785.2
Lady Glenorchy wrote from Rome on 25 November 1766 telling Lady Grey [Marchioness Grey, 1722-97] she had obtained for her the 15th-century books she had requested. 'Mr Ramsay [an unidentified companion] has looked all through the Librarys in every town we have passed through but could never find them until we came here'. She added that she or Lord Glenorchy could acquire pictures or antiques for her husband (the 2nd Earl of Hardwicke).1 Glenorchy was recorded in Rome in the summer of 1767.2
When he first went to Italy in 1771 the Duke of Gloucester still had not told his brother, King George III, of his secret marriage to the widowed Lady Waldegrave in 1766. He was not accompanied by his wife, being then preoccupied with one Madame Grovestein, a Dutch lady who met him by arrangement in Italy.1 He travelled, as he was always to do in Italy, under the alias of the 'Conte di Connaught', a device which did not prevent his progress abroad becoming a monotonous succession of receptions and celebrations. But the main, and forlorn, purpose of his visits was to seek a cure for his asthmatic condition, which was to cause alarm throughout his travels. The Duke sailed from Portsmouth and landed at Genoa on 27 September 1771.2 He lodged with the British Consul James Holford and unexpectedly had his first sight of the Young Pretender 'who immediately pulled off his hat with great Civility, & gave place to the Duke, which H.R.Hss returned in the usual polite manner.'3 The Duke sailed on to Leghorn, where he fell so ill that news reached London that he was dead. On his partial recovery he moved to Pisa with his equerries, Colonel Charles Rainsford, Major Nathaniel Heywood, Lord Cholmondeley and a Mr Lee, together with Captain John Jervis (the commander of the Alarm, the Duke's frigate). At Pisa he stayed in a house belonging to Horace Mann. At the end of November he was able to move to Florence for a week, choosing to stay at Vannini's (rather than Horace Mann's). The painter Matthew William Peters acted as his cicerone, their itinerary including visits to Francis Harwood's studio and Lord Cowper's collection.4 The Duke met Lord Tylney, and it was probably at this time that he commissioned the four landscapes from Thomas Patch which he sold (anonymously) at Christie's in 1781. Returning to Pisa on 30 November, he attended a reception on the Trident at Leghorn on 1 December,5 before suffering a further relapse which prevented him proceeding to Rome. Instead he sailed from Leghorn to Naples where he arrived on 29 December.6Although arrangements had been made for him to stay at the Palazzo Carafa, the Duke preferred the less prominent Casa Immanuele. The house was guarded to prevent him being disturbed during his illness. On 11 January 1772 he was able to introduce himself to King Ferdinand IV and Queen Maria Carolina. A concert was held in the Royal Palace to welcome him, and the following day he attended a reception for the King's birthday at the Teatro S.Carlo. The Duke several times attended the theatre with the King and Queen, and he witnessed a Royal boar hunt on 28 January at Caserta, where he had a private apartment at the Reggia. On 25 February 1772 the Duke arrived in Rome where he stayed at the Palazzo Correa.7 Thomas Jenkins (in preference to the Abbé Grant)8 was his cicerone, and on the day of his arrival the Duke watched the Corso dei Cavalli from Jenkins's window.9 The following day he learned of his mother's death, and he spent several days in deep mourning and abandoned a scheme to visit Venice. The Pope was extremely attentive, being anxious to ingratiate himself with Protestant Princes (according to Cardinal de Bernis) 'pour ménager une plus grande tolérance aux catholiques'. They met privately on 4 March and the Pope presented him with a tapestry of Cleopatra, a mosaic figure of Virtue and a collection of prints of Rome. The dome and façade of St Peter's were lit especially in honour of the Duke.10 The Jesuits were equally anxious to please him and presented him with two horses 'richement enharnachés', while he in turn was rumoured to have assured the General of the Jesuits of 'toute la protection qu'il pouvait attendre de Sa Majesté Britannique'. The Duke continued to attend the theatre and private concerts, and he indulged in much sightseeing in and around Rome. His taste in the arts was conventional and he commissioned a number of portraits of himself. 'There are four pictures painting here of his Royal Highness', it was announced in the London Chronicle (30 April/2 May 1772): 'Mr Dusign, an English painter, paints him in a conversation piece [untraced] Mr Masoon [Maron?] paints two pictures of him, one a whole length, the other a half length. Pompeo Batoni paints him. Mr Hewetson has modelled him in clay; and Signor Pickler is to cut his head in a cameo'. Of these, one of Maron's portraits, a whole-length standing by his horse dated 1772 is at Bamburgh Castle, and the Batoni (Clark/Bowron 349; replica at Houghton) and the bust by Hewetson are at Windsor. He also commissioned a moonlit landscape from Forrester (who was still working on it in 1774),11 a copy of the Guido Reni Madonna and Child in the Palazzo Colunna, and plaques of the brothers Alexei and Fyodor Orlov from Shubin (see John Dick). He bought a chimneypiece, a painted mosaic table with the Aldobrandini Marriage, and marble and alabaster tables from Giuseppe Rostagni and Vinelli. Cardinal Albani presented him with a 'Vaso di Porfido antico'. The Duke left Rome on 21 April. He stopped at Viterbo, and stayed two days in Florence before sailing from Leghorn. He was back in England by 18 May.In September 1772 the Duke of Gloucester told the King of his marriage, his wife being then pregnant, and it was consequently as a voluntary exile that he returned to Italy in 1775 with his wife and daughter, Sophia. Health was again given as the official reason for their journey. They passed through Verona, and stopped briefly in Vicenza (where the Duke visited Palladio's Villa Rotonda),12 before arriving on 22 September in Venice where they stayed at the Casa di Pietro Danna.13 They were entertained by the French Ambassador and the new British resident, John Strange, while the eccentric Edward Wortley Montagu provided 'Turkish' hospitality.14 They went on to Padua, where the Duke fell so severely ill that again his death was reported (in the London Chronicle, 7 Nov.). As soon as he had recovered, the party progressed to Bologna and Florence, and on 11 December arrived in Rome, where they stayed at the Palazzo Theodoli (later moving to the Villa Aldobrandini).15 On 28 December the royal couple was granted a Papal audience.16 The Duke's son, Prince William Frederick, was born on 15 January 1776, and christened by the Rev. Salter on 12 February.17The Duke appears to have dabbled in archaeology, and in the late spring of 1776 he was engaged in excavations with Prince Barberini. After spending the summer in Cardinal Albani's villa at Castel Gandolfo the Duke was in Rome on 31 August to attend the coronation of the famous 'improvvisatrice' known as la Corilla Olimpica'.18 The Duke and his family left Rome, unannounced, on 23 April 1777. Among those to whom he subsequently sent gifts were Prince Aldobrandini, who had attended him, and Cardinal Albani.9They reached Florence on 24 April and stayed at Hadfield's. Welcomed by Horace Mann, they visited the Grand Duke and attended a reception at Lord Cowper's.19 On their way north they spent four days in Bologna, and reached Venice on 7 May for Ascension. The Duke had planned to spend the summer at Salo on Lake Garda, but early in June he rented a villa near Verona.20 At the beginning of July he suffered a relapse, and resolved to return home immediately, through Germany.21 He was forced by illness to stop at Trent, where he lodged in a convent until mid-August and two doctors (Robert Adair and Richard Jebb) were sent from England to assist him. By 23 October 1777 the Duke and his family were back in England. The Duke had again commissioned works of art during his stay in Italy. In Padua in October 1775 he agreed to contribute towards a statue of Azzo, Marchese d'Este, founder of the house of Brunswick, (erected in 1777).22 In Rome his equestrian portrait was commissioned from Maron (untraced; early in January 1777 Maron completed the full-length portrait the Duke had commissioned in 1772).23 Batoni painted companion portraits of the Duchess with the infant William Frederick, and of Princess Sophia Matilda (Clark/ Bowron under 349 and 395, both untraced). Princess Sophia was shown fearlessly throwing a yoke upon a lion. 'The idea is very pretty', observed Father Thorpe, 'but may give offence in England'. The Duchess he painted 'holding her new born infant & looking up to heaven', his earlier proposal, showing her 'in the character of Pharoah's daughter, & the child, like a little Moses, in a cradle of rushes', having been rejected.24 Thomas Banks made a model for a marble statue of the Princess 'in the Character of Psyche plucking the Golden Wool' (RA 1781), and in 1782 a terracotta bust of the Duchess (both untraced). A bust of the Duchess attributed to Hewetson at Windsor may have been commissioned in 1786-7. Five paintings were commissioned from Carlo Labruzzi; they were unfinished when the Duke left (see Henry Blundell), and Father Thorpe reported that 'divers rich pieces of work' were executed for the Duke in Rome, including a table clock case and a chimneypiece 'contrived by himself & English artists fully acquainted with what is used & esteemed in England'.25 In March 1775 Sir William Hamilton unsuccessfully sought permission for Humphry to copy for the Duke Titian's Danae at Capodimonte (see Humphry).On his third visit in 1786, the Duke was accompanied by his family and by his mistress, Lady Almeria Carpenter, officially a lady-in-waiting to the Duchess. They spent just four months in northern Italy. Having landed at Savona, they reached Genoa on 21 January 1786. There they stayed a month26 and went on to spend three months in Milan.27 At the beginning of May the Duke was allowed a passport to travel to Venice through Austrian Lombardy28 and his party left on 11 May. They spent three days sight-seeing in Mantua, and proceded through Vicenza and Padua to Venice.The summer was passed in Switzerland and the Royal party returned to Turin on 31 October. The Duchess was still regarded by George III as the Duke's morganatic wife and she was treated accordingly at the Court of Turin.29 Among the Duke's engagements, he saw the King's collection of architectural models, which the late Duke of York had previously admired. On 5 November the Duke and his family left for Milan;30 thence they went to Parma, and travelled south to reach Rome by 22 November.31 During their month of residence they stayed at Pio's hotel; they received an audience from the Pope and attended a reception given by Cardinal de Bernis.32 At the end of December they moved on to Naples, where they spent three months at the Locanda delle Crocelle.33 They were entertained by Giardini, and were invited to performances and parties at the Teatro S.Carlo. They returned to Rome in March to stay a further month,34 before proceeding north through Florence.35 On this last visit, the Duke commissioned a double portrait of his two children from Angelica Kauffman (1787; priv. coll.).The letters the Duke wrote from Italy and Switzerland to George III show that he did not return home until he had precise guarantees that his wife would be treated as the Duchess of Gloucester, his son allowed to attend Cambridge University, and his daughter educated by a good tutor.




A sensible good natured Gentlemanlike young Man', he acted as consul in Naples in the absence of Sir James Douglas; Lord Grenville had obtained the post for him, 'as he is in a bad state of health'.1 He was requesting books from Bodoni in Parma in May and July 1796.2








Stosch recorded the arrival of a Godolphin in Rome with John King (later 2nd Baron King) on 8 January 1728; on 10 April he wrote that Godolphin had left for Florence.1 Following the death of his first wife Godolphin was again in Rome in 1737, accompanied by a Mr Hoblin [probably Robert Hoblyn]; on 27 December he shared a Papal audience with 'Hoblin' and George Sinclair (to whom he said he had previously been in Rome).2 In May and June 1737 he had written a number of letters to his sister, Mary Owen, from Geneva (NLW; Brogyntyn mss 452-4).

In 1793-4 'Ruberto Golden Arch. Inglese' was living on the Strada Felice, his age given as 22 in 1793 (AVR sa, S.Andrea delle Fratte).
Kit Golding travelled to Italy as tutor to the young Lord Dartmouth and Frederick, Lord North. In Rome on 24 March 1753 he performed, as a presbyter of the church of England, the marriage of William Chambers and Catherine More; the certificate was endorsed by Chambers to the effect that Golding was 'a fellow of a College at Oxford or Cambridge, and was at the time of his signing this certificate travell: Tutor to the Lords Dartmouth & North'.1 In the spring of 1755 Thomas Jenkins sent him a case of sulphurs.2


That Goldsmith visited Italy is not in doubt, but there is no agreed account of his journey.1 According to Percy, writing in 1801, Goldsmith 'went to Padua ... where he continued six months, and if he ever took a medical degree it was probably [here] ... Of Italy he visited all the northern part, and saw Venice, Verona and Florence. But losing his good uncle and [a] generous benefactor [a young Englishman Goldsmith had met in Geneva] while he was in Italy, he was obliged to travel on foot through France to England ... he landed at Dover about the breaking out of the war in [August] 1756'.2

Goldsworthy arrived in Leghorn to take up his post as consul on 25 September 1736 and remained there for eighteen years.1 He and his wife were frequently and disparagingly mentioned by Horace Mann (a professional rival, whose post in Tuscany Goldsworthy had greatly coveted), but Mann was nevertheless considerate towards them. Soon after her arrival Mrs Goldsworthy ('la Belle Consulesse') met in Florence (in the house of the British resident, Charles Fane) General Wachtendonck, commander of the Grand Duke's troops at Leghorn, and their subsequent relationship caused much comment. Her picture, with that of Princess Triulzi, hung by his bed, and when the General died in August 1741 it was said he had been paying her 100 sequins per month for her services.2 By January 1742 Goldsworthy was badly in debt to Chamberlain Godfrey, an English merchant at Leghorn, and Mrs Goldsworthy talked of going to England with the three small children (b. c.1736, c.1737 and 1740; a fourth child b. 1739 d. in infancy and was buried in Leghorn3) 'to move compassion'.4 When an earthquake hit Leghorn in January 1742 Mann invited Mrs Goldsworthy and her children to stay with him while their house was being repaired; she stayed with him from February to April, and only her illiteracy amused her host (e.g. 'as words is what I have not the rhetoric to find out to thank you'); Mann thought her 'a horrid fool, such a little unconnected thing and so fiddle faddle'.5 She returned to England in August 1742, just after her husband had been appointed supply agent for the British fleet in the Mediterranean. In 1746 he was charged with establishing the Protestant cemetery at Leghorn; his name, with those of John Aitken, Francis Harriman and Henry Ragueneau, is inscribed on the cemetery wall as one 'Deputed by the Nation to Oversee the Work'. Mrs Goldsworthy had returned to Leghorn by 1747, and another child was born in January 1748. She finally left Leghorn in the spring of 1753, and in September 1754 her husband left to take up his new post of consul in Cadiz.


Samuel Goodall Inglese Cavaliere di Londra' came from Padua to spend three days in Venice in November 1794;1 in December Admiral Goodall was briefly in Rome,2 before going on to Naples.3In April 1796 Admiral Goodall was in Ferrara and Florence4 and he was in Padua on 1 May with Admiral Hotham on his way to Venice.5







Gordon was described by Sir John Clerk of Penicuik in 1724, as 'a great lover of Antiquities ... who had been bred up for many years in Italy'.1 It was as an antiquary that Gordon was most celebrated in his lifetime and as which he is best remembered, but his years in Italy were largely devoted, it seems, to his first career as a singer.2His first recorded appearance in the Italian opera was in 1716 when he sang at Messina in Carlo Monza's La Principessa Fedele, listed as 'Alessandro Gordon, Britannico'. During the season 1717-18 he sang at the Teatro di San Bartolomeo in Naples. The certain evidence for his Italian operatic career is slight, but the fact that a young foreigner from remote Scotland should have found a place in one of Italy's greatest theatres is indication enough that he must have had wider experience.3 On 7 December 1719 there was a benefit concert at the theatre in Lincoln's Inn Fields for Alexander Gordon, 'lately arriv'd from Italy'. He may have brought back to England music by the Neapolitan composers Mancini and Porpora, and the score of Tigrane by Alessandro Scarlatti.In later years he told the antiquarian William Stukeley that when at Capua he had, with Sir George Byng, 'sav'd the fine amphitheatre there, the 3rd in the world, which the Germans were going to pull down to repair the fortifications, by speaking to the governor & vice roy at Naples'. Gordon published a translation of Scipione Maffei's De Amphitheatro in 1730. Gordon is said to have bought in Italy a statue of Mercury for Lord Bateman (see William Bateman), and his familiarity with Italian collections, classical monuments and the renaissance and baroque buildings of Rome, Naples and Venice is demonstrated in the preface of his Itinerarium Septentrionale [1726], his famous work on the Roman monuments of North Britain. In 1729 he published The Lives of Pope Alexander VI and his son Caesar Borgia.
The 4th Duke of Gordon travelled with his younger brother, Lord William Gordon, and a tutor, Antoine Dassier (a son of the medallist Jean Dassier). They were in Florence on 27 November, and left on 5 December for Rome,1 where they stayed several months. They visited Nathaniel Dance,2 and may have commissioned work from Angelica Kauffman.3 The Duke sat to Batoni (SNG; Clark/Bowron 279), but he was apparently left unmoved by antiquity; he 'showed scarcely a trace of animation as he sat in his carriage, while Winckelmann described to him, with the choicest expressions and grandest illustrations, the beauties of the ancient works of art'.4 From 11 May to 12 June the brothers were in Venice, where they accompanied Lord Northampton on his offical entry on 29/30 May.5 The brothers were in Geneva in September.6 Copies by Harwood of an Apollo and Venus, and busts of Homer and Seneca, dating from 1763-5, were at Gordon Castle, probably commissioned by the Duke in Rome.7


The Duchess and her second husband, Colonel Morris, left Rome in December 1772 for Naples.1 They were seen at Rome in the following April,2 and were reported in Venice on 22 May.3 'Colonello Moris' arrived in Venice on 20 May 1773.4
Edward Gordon, 'Inglese - 35' was living with his wife, 'Madama Moglie - 24', on the Strada Gregoriana in Rome in 1796.1 He was presumably the Edward Gordon who had been a close friend of the sculptor John Deare, as described by Grignion in 1798.2 He was also probably the Gordon with whom Artaud and Fuller were dining in Rome on 2 November 1797.3




Converted to Catholicism by Bossuet in Paris, Gordon came to Rome in 1702 and made a public abjuration of his Protestantism. At his conditional baptism he took the additional name of Clement, after the Pope. In 1704 the Inquisition pronounced his Protestant orders invalid; Clement XI gave him the benefice of the Abbey of St Clement, and Gordon was known as the Abate Clemente. He died in Rome (DNB).
In the spring of 1776 she was seen in Rome with her aunt, Lady Euphemia Stewart;1 they were again noticed in Rome in (or about) March 1778.2
Pryse Gordon went to Italy in 1797 with his friend Lord Montgomerie, and their travels furnish part of his raffish Memoirs, in which a strict chronology is not observed.1 It was not a particularly good time to travel, with the French invasion of Italy under way, but this was a circumstance from which ultimately they profited. They first spent nine months in Florence and Pisa. In Florence 'in 1799' [perhaps 1798] Gordon met the daughter of the enamellist 'Gregory' [i.e. MacPherson] and bought a collection of his works for fifty crowns (1:444). With Montgomerie's health improving, they proceeded to Naples (having heard of King Ferdinand's march on Rome). They stayed six weeks, and left for Palermo in April 1799 as the French approached Capua (1:191, 200). Gordon later alleged he acted as interpreter for Nelson's forces at the suppression of Ruffo's lazzaroni (2:343-4, see William Hamilton). Gordon visited Malta and explored Sicily (1:229) before they sailed in September to Leghorn, whence they passed straight to Rome. 'At this time there was not a single Englishman in Rome, except two or three artists' (1:230)-of whom he named his uncle Mr [Colin] Morison (1:444), 'who had lived more than half a century at Rome' (2:11), Alexander Day (2:12) and Angelica Kauffman (2:55), to whom Montgomerie sat in highland costume.2 Despite the desertion of the city, they undertook a six-week course on the antiquities from John Rushout and a Mr More which, however, they found 'irksome' and gave up (1:230). Gordon observed that since they 'were the first Englishmen who visited Rome after the counter revolution' they could have acquired many works of art very cheaply, for since the French had abrogated the Roman law by which family pictures were regarded as heirlooms, they were being sold off by impoverished families. Gordon managed to acquire a Titian and an Annibale Carracci, which he mentioned 'to show what bargains, if one had funds, might have been picked up at this time; but shortly after hordes of English arrived, and the market rose 500%' (2:11-15). Lord Montgomerie developed an interest in architecture and pictures on which he laid out a few hundred pounds (2:37). Gordon also bought portfolios of drawings in Florence (some of which he sold to William Ottley), and in Sicily he had acquired 'nearly 2000 Greek medals chiefly in copper'. They returned to Tuscany in April 1800 and left Italy through Venice. After travelling through Germany they arrived back in England in May 1801 (1:233-4).
A Catholic theologian and Biblical scholar, he first studied at the Scots College in Rome from 1705 to his ordination in 1712.1 In 1743 he returned to Rome seeking approval for his English translation of the New Testament, but he met opposition and left Italy in 1745. He was apprehended in London and banished. After spending some time in Flanders and Paris he again went to Rome in 1749. He made a hermitage for himself at Narni where he remained four years, before returning to Paris. His translation, which corrected previous Catholic versions, remained unapproved and unpublished (DNB).

On 13 September 1764 William Gordon was on his way from Geneva to Turin, 'to make the Tour of Italy & Spain'.1 He arrived in Rome in January 1765 with a letter of introduction to Cardinal Albani from Horace Mann.2 On 5 April the Abbé Grant took him and Boswell to St Peter's, where he commented that, 'though as a heretic he was sure to be damned, he was glad to see so many other people going to heaven'.3 The following day the Abbé went with him and Sir William Farington into the country round Rome.4 On 18 April Boswell saw Batoni drawing the drapery for Gordon's celebrated portrait which shows him in the uniform of the Queen's Own Royal Highlanders wearing the Huntly Tartan; Batoni interpreted the 'belted plaid' as something approaching a classical toga (Fyvie; Clark/ Bowron 298).
He may have returned to Italy in 1770-1 following the outcry over his elopement with Lady Sarah Bunbury; he had then left England intending to walk to Rome with 'no other companion than a very big dog' (see Commons 2, 2:519).
A well-travelled Scot whom the Wynnes first found very amiable; he saw them frequently in Florence in the summer of 1796, but in Naples in January 1797 the cordiality had worn off (Wynne Diaries, 2:85,87, 123, 149).
Gore, a cultured Lincolnshire landowner, had married Mary Cockerell, the heiress of a Scarborough shipbuilding family. It was the unsatisfactory state of her health which led them to spend the winter of 1772-3 in Lisbon and then to sail on to Italy. In March 1773, with his wife and three attractive young daughters, he arrived in Florence. His youngest child, Hannah then aged fifteen, there became engaged to the 3rd Earl Cowper (an event recorded in a group portrait by Zoffany; YCBA); they were to be married on 2 June 1775. The family were in Rome by December 1774, when Father Thorpe commented on the presence of Mrs Gore and her 'three pretty daughters', each of whom, he alleged, had 'a fortune of £50.000'.1 Philipp Hackert became the drawing master for Eliza (1754-1802) and Emily (1755-1832) at Castel Gandolfo during the summer and in Rome during the winter. William Pars may have also given them instruction.2 Their father became a close friend of Hackert, and Goethe described how the two spent two summers together at Castel Gandolfo and Albano making drawings from nature, while in the winter Gore spent most of his evenings at Hackert's house in a circle of artists discussing art and letters.3 Gore was himself an amateur artist of some distinction and this, with his interest in archaeology, led him to join Hackert and Richard Payne Knight on their expedition to Sicily between April and June 1777, see Knight. Gore's sketches from this tour (BMPL) were intended for publication.4 Meanwhile in 1776 Eliza's name had been linked with that of Sir Harry Fetherstonhaugh, but the affair was short lived, see Fetherstonhaugh. On 12 July 1777 the Gore family were said to be leaving Rome 'next week'.5 Among the many drawings by Gore preserved in the Goethes Kunstsammlungen, Weimar, is one of Venice dated 'Ascensiontide 1778', but the Gore family spent most of their last two years abroad in Switzerland, before arriving back in England in 1779.Late in 1782 Charles Gore with his daughter Emily and Dr Thomas Bowdler made a hurried trip to Florence where Hannah, Lady Cowper, was thought to be unwell (see also Bowdler). 'They will find her quite recovered', observed Mann, 'and probably will lay hold of that opportunity to press my Lord [Cowper] to return to England'. The scheme, if it existed, did not succeed and in April 1783 Charles returned to England, apparently with Bowdler, while Emily stayed on with her sister.6 Gore eventually returned to the Continent, where his wife died in 1785. Six years later he settled with his daughter Eliza in Weimar, where Charles became one of Goethe's closest English friends. Both father and daughter died in Weimar.7
Hannah Gore travelled with her parents and two sisters to Florence in 1774 where she became engaged, at the age of fifteen, to George, 3rd Earl Cowper. Her father commissioned Zoffany to paint a group portrait of the family with Cowper (YCBA) and Cowper commissioned a portrait of her from the same artist (Firle Place). When the family moved to Rome, Cowper followed in hot pursuit. They were married privately in Florence on 2 June 1775. Gore provided a large dowry and promised a settlement of £8000 on each of the younger children from the union; nevertheless, Cowper managed to quarrel with him.1 Lady Cowper bore three sons in 1776, 1778 and 1779, but from the moment of the marriage there was concern about the couple's happiness. In March 1776 Horace Mann had to silence Horace Walpole by insisting that 'The Earl & Css of Cowper live upon the best of terms together.'2 Mrs Hervey wrote in 1777 that 'Lady Cowper is a pretty little childish woman whom her husband abandons to her follies & other people's',3 and Thomas Pelham wrote the same year that 'the invidious & scandalous Florentines suppose Lady Cowper's intimacy at the Palace to be criminal'.4 In November 1779 Lord Herbert said that Prince Andrei Kilvillovich Razumovskii was 'most terribly taken with Lady Cowper'.5 But the affair which was perhaps the most torrid was with Robert Merry in the mid-1780s.6 According to Lady Mary Coke there can be little doubt that she had 'given room for conversation'.7 'She is the most beautiful woman I ever saw', Thomas Brand rhapsodised but, he continued, she was 'proud and capricious & almost all the travellers of this season [1784] are disgusted with her'.8 After Lord Cowper's death in 1789 Lady Cowper continued to live in Florence where she was often attended by her sister Emily. At Leghorn there is a tomb to their servant Julian Boering with a dedication from the two sisters.9 In 1792 Lady Palmerston had 'the greatest Curiosity to see her having heard so much about her - Her Eyes are the finest long blue Eyes I ever look'd'.10 The following year Brand again expressed concern at her 'capricious behaviour' and regretted that 'her talents, her politeness, and her very superior excellence in the art of pleasing should be so obscured by envy, vanity, and temper'. The same letter refers to two portraits of Lady Cowper: a copy by Anna Tonelli of H.D. Hamilton's 'beautiful' picture, and another by Angelica Kauffman, recently completed, full 'of truth and character'11 (both untraced). Lady Cowper stayed in Italy until her death in 1826 and she was buried at Leghorn.12
Mr Gore arrived in Florence in January 1767,1 and 'Gore, Lord Arran's son' was presented to (and dined with) the Grand Duke later that month.2 He sat to Batoni in Rome; the portrait, which is dated 1769 (perhaps completed sometime after Gore's sittings) includes an apparently allegorical image of the sitter's wife with a Cupid (Clark/Bowron 335; priv. coll.); it was previously identified as Arthur Saunders Gore (later 2nd Earl of Arran) who, however, had succeeded as Viscount Sudley in 1762;
Mr Gore arrived in Leghorn on 13 January 1734.1 'Mr Gore Gentleman Commoner of Christ Church' was in Florence on 4 February 1734, and was afterwards in Rome.2 On 27 October 1734 Gore and [Rudolph] Knight left Florence for Bologna and Venice.3 He was doubtless the Gore elected to the Society of Dilettanti in 1737.
Possibly also the Mr Gore recorded in Rome during the winter of 1785-6 (Quin jnl.mss).
Mr Goring attended the Pretender's son, Charles, on his tour of Italy in 1737.1 He was presumably 'Sir Harry Goring's son' who was reported in the Pretender's service in March 1733.2
Gormanston appears to have been travelling with the Catholic antiquary John Needham as his tutor. He was in Venice in November 1760,1 and was enchanted by Milan where he arrived with Needham in April 1761.2 James Adam saw him in Rome later that year.3 In 'Xbre 1760' a 'Lord Gorrington', conceivably Gormanston, exported 5 tavoli di marmo, 4 bas-reliefs and a copy of a Marcus Aurelius statue.4



1. C. Hibbert, Grand Tour, 188. F. Fraser, Beloved Emma, 94. 2. Borroni 1979, 1258.

Edward George Pictor Anglus' was in Padua on 17 March 1705.1 He was in Rome in 1707 when he painted the portraits of the Blathwayt brothers (Dyrham), and his receipt for 14 French pistoles 'for Painting the Pictures of Mesrs.Blathwait Rome' is dated 27 September 1707.2 In December these portraits were admired by the Grand Duke in Florence, who pronounced them 'fort rassemblants', and the previous month copies had been made by a Frenchman for a M. D'Arzelliers.3 Gouge had also been commissioned by Sir John Perceval to make some copies of Italian paintings. On 18 June Gouge told him that, having been 'employed in doing some Retralto's, and likewise have been learning to paint in guatso and fresco', he would begin his work for him, 'and do little else'.4 In October Perceval asked of his progress: 'I suppose you began with something in Caraches Gallery, for that was your intention'; on 22 November Magnolfi told Perceval that Gouge 'is well and goes on very well at Farnese's Gallery, and improves every day, having been so kind as to send me a copy of a picture', adding 'the Great Duke, my master, says he will be, if he continues a very good painter'. Perceval's last letter to Gouge in Rome was dated London, 27 December 1707. Perceval subsequently annotated their correspondence with a note on Gouge: 'a good face painter at his return to England but falling into drunken company lost his business and died worse than nothing in 1735. He turned Papist in Rome'.
Goulburn travelled with a governor, the Rev. John Shebbeare. They were seen in Genoa and Rome by Thomas Pelham, who wrote from Rome on 12 July that they were soon going to England;1 they arrived in Venice on 20 August 1777.2
Daniel Gould, presumably the same, was appointed British consul in Naples from 20 April 1706 to 15 November 1707 when John Fleetwood succeeded him (Pagano de Divitiis, 230, 326).
A successful merchant, by 1710 he had a country house outside Leghorn.1 He was probably the 'Signor Gould' who had bought pictures by 'Redi' sometime before 1723.2 Thomas Coke had dealings with the firm of Gould, Harriman and Fuller of Leghorn in 1717.3 Edward Gould and his son, also Edward, signed a memorial concerning the appointment of a British chaplain at Leghorn in 1710.4
Gowan was in Naples in March 1791, when Whaley Armitage described him as once of Southampton, now of Chichester, and formerly an artillery officer who had served in India in 1757; he was about fifty-five or fifty-six and abounded 'with anecdotes of genteel life'; he left Naples for Rome on 31 March (Armitage jnl.mss).
A delicate and studious child, Lord Gower had been educated in Auxerre and, after leaving Oxford, had travelled in northern Europe in 1781. He came to Italy in 1786 (DNB) with his wife, the Countess of Sutherland, and they were listed in Naples in January 1787.1 He was presumably back in England in May 1787 when he was returned to Parliament.
Lord 'Gorin' arrived in Florence on 15 July 1739 (with a Mr Jefferys).1 In April 1744 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu remembered having seen him in Venice [between September 1739 and July 1740], 'a very well dispos'd young Man'.2
Graefer was a protégé of Sir Joseph Banks, who sent him out to Naples to create a garden in the English taste for the Queen of Naples. He arrived at Naples on 18 April 1786, and within a week Sir William Hamilton had taken him to Caserta to choose a site.1 Graefer was accompanied by his wife Caroline (from Chester),2 and in January 1787 there were at least two children.3 By 1789, despite the jealousies of Italian gardeners and the difficulties of getting paid by Queen Maria Carolina, Graefer's fifty-acre garden was nearing completion: with 'pleasant lawns, interspersed with clumps of myrtle and other shrubs'.4 The King had a house built for Graefer within the garden wall, and in 1792 was godfather to one of the Graefer's children. In June 1793 Emma Hamilton described Graefer as being 'as happy as a Prince'; the King and Queen went to his garden every day and it was 'Sir William's favourite child'.5 In October 1790 Graefer had accompanied Richard Colt Hoare on an excursion to Caiazzo and Piedimonte.6 In September 1801 Graefer was acting, without much success, as Nelson's agent for his estate at Bronte in Sicily.7 Mrs Graefer remained at Bronte after her husband's death, with two daughters, Emma and Caroline, apparently in somewhat straitened circumstances.8
A Jacobite, John Graeme left Lyons for Italy with the Rev. G. Barclay on 31 August 1717. Captain John Graeme's letters from Rome were being forwarded to Scotland from Paris in June 1718.1 In 1727 John Graeme was appointed secretary of state in the Jacobite Court at Rome in place of Colonel John Hay,2 Stosch erroneously calling him Sir Robert Graham.3 In January 1744 he accompanied the Young Pretender from Rome to Paris, and he appears to have stayed with him for some time in France after 1745.4 In 1759 he was called back from France to succeed Lord Lismore as the the Pretender's principal secretary, a position he held until his retirement to Paris in 1763.5
A relation of the 3rd Earl of Bute, in 1755 General Graeme was appointed commander of the Venetian land forces in succession to Marshal Schulenberg. In September 1756 he met Lady Mary Wortley Montagu in Venice, Lady Bute having particularly asked him to look into her mother's wayward affairs. He was also a friend of Algarotti, who was then in Bologna.1 In July and August 1757 he received Robert Adam (whom he had previously met at Tournai) in Pola,2 Graeme then being in the course of a fourteen months tour of military establishments in Istria, Dalmatia, Albania and the Grecian Islands, from which he returned to Venice in September 1758.3 Between February and June 1760 Graeme took leave in England, and he returned with James Adam, who found him rather 'crabbed' (they reached Turin on 13 June and Venice on the 25th).4 From Venice in November 1760 Graeme was advising Lord Bute that Joseph Smith's collections might come up for sale when he retired.5 His name frequently recurs in Lady Mary Wortley Montagu's letters between 1758 and 1761, primarily because of his precarious state of health. In August 1761 she thought him 'mortally ill'; she had previously described his comfortable circumstances at Venice as having 'at least £900 sterling hand pay, nothing to do, and [he] may, if he pleases, shine in this Country for that Sum'.6 In December 1764 James Martin saw him at Lady Wentworth's in Venice,7 and in July 1765 Lord Mountstuart with James Boswell stayed in his country house at Monigo, Boswell saying the General was a 'very sensible polite man'.8 Graeme's portrait with an aide-de-camp by Pietro Longhi is in the Museo Correr.
After leaving Cambridge he first went to Italy in 1753, as the Earl of Euston, but little is recorded of his tour. He had with him a Swiss tutor, Alléon, 'a real gentleman ... more fitted to form the polite man than to assist or encourage, any progress in literary pursuits'.1 He was in Turin in November 17532 and went on to Rome via Florence; in March 1754 he visited Naples where he was presented to the Queen, but he stayed only a few days before setting out for Rome on 26 March.3 As the 3rd Duke of Grafton he returned to Italy in 1761-2, allegedly for the sake of his Duchess's health, but the motif was more probably an attempt to retrieve a floundering marriage.4 They took with them their four-year-old daughter Georgiana (later Mrs John Smyth). Walpole, an admirer of the Duchess, announced her visit to Horace Mann: 'She is one of our first great Ladies. She goes first to Genoa - an odd place for her health, but she is not very bad. The Duke goes with her, and as it is not much from inclination that she goes, perhaps they will not agree whither they shall go next. He is a man of strict honour, and does not want sense, nor good breeding; but is not particularly familiar, nor particularly good-humoured, nor at all particularly generous'.5 They were next in Turin, where the Duke was privileged to wear the royal hunting uniform, an uncommon distinction, accorded because he was a distant relative of the King of Sardinia. Louis Dutens made a great fuss of them, 'procuring so many amusements, that instead of eight days, as they at first proposed, they remained at Turin eight weeks'.6 They left on 30 December and stayed briefly in Milan, where the Duke was able to renew his acquaintance with the Count de Firmian (whom he had met on his youthful tour in Naples). They travelled down the Adriatic coast to Rome, where they arrived on 1 February 1762. They stayed at Leoncilli's hotel on the Via Babuino (see above, p.xxiii), intending 'to pass some months with us', wrote the Abbé Grant, who had eased their passage through the Roman Custom House, and had observed that the Duchess was served 'by the amiable Princess Colonna'.7 The Duke sat to Batoni (NPG; Clark/Bowron 255) and met John Hinchliffe, who became a lifelong friend. In March he went with the 3rd Duke of Roxburghe, the Marquess of Tavistock, Sir Richard Lyttelton and others to the Vatican library, to examine Egyptian characters.8 His Duchess meanwhile indulged a love of cards9 and Walpole reported in March that she was one of those 'miraculously' preserved in Rome 'by being at loo, instead of going to a grand concert, where the palace fell in'.10 They left Rome on Easter Sunday, 11 April 1762, and came to Florence on 15 April.11 There the Duchess, who made some study of Italian and music, was attended by the Countess Marianna Acciaioli, and fussed over by Mann.12 They left Florence on 8 May, intending to pass a day in Bologna and two in Turin, before passing two months in Geneva and returning to England in August; the Duchess was 'certainly harried out of Italy contrary to her inclinations', wrote Mann.13 They were in England on 1 September, when Walpole found the Duchess changed, thinner and 'not dressed French, but Italian, that is, over-French'.14
The 2nd Duke of Grafton was in Padua on 17 February 1701 with Humphrey Rescorloe (perhaps his tutor).1 Some seven years later he was described by Bishop Burnet as 'a very pretty gentleman [who] has been abroad in the world' (CP). A painting by Viviani showing the Duke with William Kent in the church of S.Paolo fuori le Mura, Rome (Euston; a version sold Christie's, 1 Jun. 1934; 15 Jun. 1951 and 19 Oct. 1951), would indicate a second visit after 1709 and before 1719.
James Graham was in Italy with a tutor, Dr John Innes. They were in Padua on 11 November 1722, Innes described as a Scot, 'Phil et Medecin Doctor Patavinus';1 he received his Doctorate at the University on 21 November.2 In December Stosch mentioned in Rome 'Mr Graems near Calender en Ecosse parent de My Lord Linthitgo avec son Gouverneur nommé Ennis'.3 Dr Innes with Mr Pelham, Edward Finch and St Clair, left Rome for Florence on 7 April 1723.4
Sir James travelled with the Rev. Thomas Brand (c.1751-1814), whose letters supply the itinerary for their tour. They had spent a year in France and Switzerland before reaching Turin in October 1783 and on the 19th they were presented at Court by De Souza, the Portuguese minister.1 In Bologna Brand wrote how they dined together, but he would put Graham 'under the care of the Ladies' while he looked at 'the great Pictures' by himself.2 Their paths frequently crossed those of William and Richard Assheton, Thomas Pitt (b.c.1758) and the Berrys in Turin, Genoa, Parma and Rome,3 where Graham and Brand had arrived by 20 December. Both sat to Angelica Kauffman, probably that same month.4 By 17 January they were in Naples, where Dr Parkinson first noticed them.5 Parkinson was attending Jonas Brooke, a College friend of Graham's, and the two spent much time together in Italy thereafter (see Jonas Brooke).In March and April 1784 they were both at Rome in a party of seven following a course of antiquities under James Byres6 and on 21 April they attended a large dinner at the Villa Madama, among the many other guests being Lady Elizabeth Foster and Sir George and Lady Warren. Graham and Brand left Rome at the end of April, passing through Florence and Bologna on their way to Venice, which they reached on 15 May.7 It was either in Florence or Venice that Graham sat to H.D. Hamilton, whose portrait was seen in his studio in Florence on 12 November 1784 and considered 'as like as possible'.8 Brand mentioned two 'very pretty' pictures which Graham had bought from 'the little Canonico's brother', apparently at Bologna.9 Sir James Hall joined them in Venice, and on 27 May they went together to Padua. Hall's journal records Graham being with him in Verona on 29 May and in Mantua the following day.10 By the end of June Brand and Graham were in Geneva.11
Lord Graham was dining with Lady Orford in Naples in February 1777.1 Thomas Pelham said he was at Milan in September, expected in Venice in October, and would be in Verona en route to Munich later that same month.2




Soon after Thomas Graham entered Christ Church his father died, and his guardians (his mother, the 9th Earl of Kinnoull and the 2nd Earl of Hopetoun) resolved to send him abroad to complete his education.1 Kinnoull told him (18 Nov. 1767) he should spend a year in France and then proceed to Italy and Germany; he should seek out 'men of letters and knowledge'; in Italy he could refine his taste but should beware of the women who were 'bewitching sirens who fascinated young men if they are not upon their guard'. 'Grahamo' was in Florence on 11 November 1769,2 and in Rome on 25 December.3 His whole-length portrait by David Allan was painted in Rome (YCBA). He was back in Scotland by 1771. He was apparently accompanied during his tour by his cousin Lord Hope (CP; one of the sons of the 2nd Earl of Hopetoun).Following his wife's death in 1792, Graham pursued a distinguished military career. He was in northern Italy from May 1796.4 In December he was trapped with the Austrian forces in Mantua, but succeeded in escaping through the French lines to report their plight to the Imperial commander. From 1816 Lord Lynedoch, as he had become, travelled regularly on the Continent and paid a number of visits to Italy.


Mr Grahme a Scotch Gentleman' died in Rome on 23 March 1723 and 'was buried the same night near the tomb of Cestius near the porta San Paolo' (Rawlinson jnl.mss, 23 Mar. 1723).Graham had arrived in Rome with Thomas Smith, a merchant, Stophard [Stopford] and [Coftus?] by 16 February 1726;1 on 7 May 1726 'Greyham and Stopford' arrived in Leghorn from Rome, giving news of the Pretender's movements.2

The Marquess of Granby made the grand tour under the supervision of John Ewer, his former Eton tutor and subsequently a Bishop, and William Hewett, who was to achieve a certain reputation as an eccentric traveller.1 Granby and Hewett were in Venice by 22 December 1739 and apparently stayed until the following April, when they set out for Constantinople.2
Lord Grandison, a man of elegant and extravagant tastes, first visited Italy after succeeding to his mother's title and estates. He came to Naples from Rome in April 1783, bringing Allan Ramsay some pamphlets from James Byres; on 1 May he was with Ramsay at Herculaneum and the next day at Portici.1 He was next in Italy in 1792 with his sickly wife and fourteen-year-old daughter, Lady Gertrude Villiers. They were in Venice between 17 and 20 September,2 and from 'about the 25th' of October to January in Genoa, where Dr William Batt attended Lady Grandison.3 Mrs Porter and a Mrs Hatfield nursed her; her illness ('hysteria' and 'worms') prevented their intended departure for Naples in December, and they then determined to set off for 'Florence Rome & Naples' as soon as the cold weather relented.4 It appears they went instead to Switzerland, for it was there in September 1793 that Lady Grandison died.Very soon afterwards Grandison returned to Italy with his daughter. They were in Naples in November; on 4 December John Farr Abbot, whose wife was then dying in Naples, visited 'Lord Grandison who having lately lost his Lady in a Similar Situation was extremely attentive to him'.5 By 24 December Grandison was receiving company twice weekly;6 in February Lord Granville Leveson Gower was telling his mother that he regularly supped at Lord Grandison's,7 while Lady Bessborough was then said to receive 'company on Mondays and Thursdays and Lord Grandison on Tuesdays and Saturdays'.8 Grandison was in Rome by May; he went on an excursion to Tivoli with Lady Webster and the Bessboroughs,9 and Lady Gertrude sat to Angelica Kauffman.10 He was in Venice by 28 May,11 and Verona in June, intending to go straight to Salzburg and Munich.12

Apprentice to the merchant James Bird in Leghorn, he was described as 'an uncommon young man - though only seventeen years of age, with extraordinary knowledge, he is steady and sensible'.1 He died in Leghorn in 1852 having been a merchant there for sixty years.2
With Sir Henry Erskine and David Hume, he acted as aide-de-camp to General James St Clair during his diplomatic mission to Turin in 1748, see Hume. In 1752 James St Clair appointed Grant travelling tutor to his grand-nephew, the 18th Earl of Sutherland. Both were called back to their regiment in Ireland in 1755 (Commons 2, 2:530).
James Grant appears to have spent almost a year in Geneva before entering Italy.1 With his travelling companion Thomas Wynn (later Lord Newborough) he was expected in Turin in October 1759;2 they were in Milan on 1 December, and in Naples on 1 January 1760. On 10 February they were expected in Rome,3 where they stayed in the Casa Guarnieri,4 and were guided by Grant's clansman, the Abbé Peter Grant. James Grant took a music master, Cassali,5 and he sat to Nathaniel Dance for a conversation piece with Wynn, Thomas Robinson and John Mytton (YCBA and Philadelphia MA). Grant and Wynn left Rome in May 1760, and passed through Florence (where Grant acquired a passport for travel through Germany and Holland to England6) and Bologna on their way to Venice, where their fine apartment, chez la Mingotte, 'with seven great rooms', was taken over by James Adam on 25 June.7 Grant then went straight to Munich, but Wynn stayed on in Italy. By 25 July Joseph Wilcocks and Thomas Jenkins had left Rome to meet Wynn and Sir Henry Mainwaring in Florence.8 It appears Wynn then returned to Venice with Wilcocks, as in October the Abbé Grant wrote that Wynn (by then in Munich) had 'met Wilcocks in Venice with whom he stayed three weeks longer than he proposed. They went from thence to Verona where they parted'.9 Wynn was back in England by February 1761.10 'It was with infinite regret that I left Rome', wrote James Grant, and of the many commissions he had left behind he added 'how they are to be paid God knows, - but that is the least of our thoughts'.11 The Abbé Grant subsequently acted as his agent and regularly informed him of progress.12 Grant's portrait by Blanchet (Sotheby's, 13 Mar. 1985) neared completion by 17 May 1760 and Tibaldi had copied in miniature his portrait by Gavin Hamilton for Wynn in Florence (17 May, 5 Jul. 1760); Mengs's daughter was to make a second miniature copy (19 Jun. 1760), and Colin Morison a third (5 Jul.). Plimmer had commissions for two historical landscapes, Dido and Aeneas in the Storm and Landing of Aeneas in Africa, which were soon to be ready on 12 July 1760; but they were unfinished when Plimmer died in November and were eventually completed by Robert Crone in 1764 (17 Feb. 1764). The Abbé Grant paid the enamellist Macpherson for unspecified work for James Grant (22 Oct. 1760). Colin Morison was copying a picture which he intended to send James Grant when finished (1 Aug. 1761) and his Andromache (from Cullen House; Christie's, 22 Sep. 1975) was presumably the picture also mentioned by the Abbé on 22 October 1760 (Morison would soon send a 'drawing of the composition he had projected when you were here'). The correspondence was principally concerned with the slow progress of the most important commissions, the Achilles lamenting the death of Patroclus by Gavin Hamilton (SNG) and the Nisus and Euryalus by Nathaniel Dance; the first was eventually finished and sent off in October 1764, while the second appears never to have been completed (17 Feb., 3 Oct. 1764). Grant remained a patron of Scottish painters (see James Clark), and it is evident from the Abbé Grant's letters that he retained an interest in Italian music and musicians; the Abbé sent him scores by Borghi and told him of Italian performers-the singer Clementina Cremonini or the harpsichordist Felice Dona-who were coming, or hoping to come, to Britain (17 Aug. 1764, 1 Aug. 1761, 20 Jan. 1762).
In a letter from Vienna of 15 January 1779 Grant anticipated his forthcoming visit to Italy;1 in August 1779 Hippisley refers to James Clark, the antiquary, attending Mr Grant in Naples for '3 or 4 days'.2
He was described in May 1734 as a Scot, 'a young man of about 26' who wore 'an Abbé dress and had studied eight years in Rome'; he had been sent to Bordeaux 'on the Pretender's affairs' and had come to Florence 'about six months ago'; by 15 May 1734 he had gone to Leghorn 'to proceed to Scotland' (SP 98/35, Skinner, 11, 15 May 1734).

For nearly fifty years the Abbé Grant was something of an institution in Rome, an amiable busy-body ever anxious to attend the more distinguished British travellers. His profession eventually appeared to be a convenient means to such sycophantic ends, although it had begun seriously enough. At the age of eighteen he had attended the Scots College in Rome and was ordained. In 17351 he returned to Scotland. Two years later he was appointed Roman Agent to the Scottish Catholic Mission, and he came back to Rome where he was based for the rest of his life. In 1738 he submitted a Memoria circa alcuni disordini del Collegio Scozzese concerning a Jansenist faction within the Mission, but he was not an assiduous agent. In 1749 the Catholic Bishops in Scotland asked Cardinal Riviera to send him home, but he survived. He was to be a poor correspondent with the Scottish Bishops; he could give his address as Au Caffee Anglais, place d'Espagne, which seemed inappropriate, and it took him two months to inform the Mission of the death of Clement XIV, which he justified as due to his 'utter inconsolableness'.2 He stayed on, living in good apartments in the Piazza Navona, while continuing to attract such comments as Lumisden's in 1765 that Grant 'has retired to the country, perhaps to perform a spiritual retreat, to atone for his winter's conduct'.3 Grant wished to be 'all things to all men, a Jacobite to Jacobites, a Georgite to Georgites, and an agreeable companion to every one',4 but as a Scots Catholic in Rome he was always to be regarded with a degree of suspicion. Albani warned in 1744 that visiting English noblemen in Rome should not be taken in by the Abbé's insinuating manners,5 and in 1745 Horace Mann thought he 'was totally in the Pretender's interest' (the Abbé later and romantically told Henry Swinburne he had fought in the '45 and had been brought to London with Lords Balmerinoch, Kilmarnock, etc., but was aquitted and came straight after to Rome).6 In 1766 when the Young Pretender arrived in Rome and was received at the English and Scots Colleges, Grant was very busy, as a result of which his pension from the Roman government was taken from him and he was told not to frequent the Pope's ministers nor to approach any of his palaces,7 but he recovered from that also. In 1773 Isaac Jamineau, the British consul in Naples, alleged Grant was introducing British visitors to the Young Pretender and called him 'a damned rascal' and 'a Scotch Rebel and a Traitor to his Country' (he in turn called Jamineau 'a French Jew'), and it was left to Sir William Hamilton to point out that Grant was 'very serviceable and obliging' at Rome where the British had no Minister;8 travellers were already calling him 'the English Ambassador'.9 He had overall a privileged relationship with the Vatican, from whom he received an annuity of £20 'with great promises of something more considerable', he told James Grant of Castle Grant in one of the earlier letters of that extensive correspondence with his clansman (Seafield mss, gd 248/; 22 Oct. 1760). He was apparently a particular favourite of Pope Clement XIV. 'Tis known by this whole metropolis that he frequently sends for me and keeps me closeted with him for an hour at each time', Grant told Bishop Hay.10 In 1772 Grant wrote that the Pope had gone so far 'as to promise of his own accord to do great matters for me',11 but a Cardinal's hat eluded him to the end. Clement XIV died in September 1774. His successor, Pius VI, was perhaps not impressed by the Abbé when, in May 1778, he brought Swinburne for an audience, but 'talked so much that the Pope could not get in a word'.12 In 1773 the young Lord Winchilsea wrote that Grant 'has exactly the appearance of an Italian Abbe'; 'he is in expectation of something from the Pope, or I should say rather hopes, as every body else says the Pope has not much thought of doing any thing for him; he is always very happy to see him & hugs him, but for any preferment it is I am afraid out of the Question'.13 Winchilsea also remarked that Grant 'is not I believe very well off', a circumstance observed by Philip Francis. He was introduced to the Vatican by Grant who received no direct payment but, being 'resolved however not to lose anything by us', insisted on a number of payments for the servants or for charity and sold him a fan 'for 6 sequins not worth one'.14 In January 1754 Albani had described him not only as a firm supporter of the Pretender, but as one who accosted all Englishmen of position who came to Rome and served them by showing them whatever there was to be seen that was remarkable; he was then working in alliance with the young Irish painter Jacob Ennis, and both resented the emergence of Thomas Jenkins as a rival cicerone.15 There was room, however, for Grant, Jenkins and Byres in Rome and their relationship improved with time. Grant was, it appears, a kind and obsequious adviser. In 1741 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu found him 'a very honest, good naturd North Briton, who has resided several years in Rome',16 and that same year we glimpse the Abbé visiting Albano in the distinguished company of Lord Lincoln, Lord and Lady Pomfret and George Pitt.17 His appetite for society was insatiable, and provides a recurring theme in his letters to James Grant. The 'adorable Princess Colonna is most gracious to me; you will be rejoyced to learn I am on so good a footing with people of such rank and merit' (9 May 1761); in Naples, with the 'adorable' Lady Stanhope and Sir William, 'I have much notice taken of me by everybody' (17 Apr. 1762). He was particularly proud to be of service to the 3rd Earl of Bute in Rome in 1769: 'he sees no mortal but Mr Byres and your humble servant, as for the Marquis Tannucci or any of your great folks he'll certainly have nothing to do with, nor even exchange one word with', he told William Hamilton, adding ingenuously that Bute was 'a profound connesseur'.18 Grant was particularly attentive to the Scots. He watched over the painters Katherine Read (in 1752) and Anne Forbes (in 1767-71) and evidently found the pretence of the Adam brothers particularly to his liking.19 Robert Adam called him 'dear old Grantibus', 'as good a Jacobite and as good a Catholic, as true a friend and as worthy a man as e'er a Christian in Europe. We are two brothers. He is constantly with me, for four or five hours at a time'. With Adam, Allan Ramsay and Robert Wood he formed a 'Caledonian Club' where they could gossip in the 'ain Mither tongue'. But apart from being genial, Grant was useful. He acted as banker for James Adam,20 and James Grant; he introduced Robert Adam to Sir William Stanhope and Robert Mylne to Lord Charlemont;21 he gave James Adam sound advice against an oriental voyage 'with his usual vehemence'; he witnessed the marriage of William Chambers to Catherine More in 1753.His support of British artists in Rome was considerable. He accompanied Patch before the Notary of the Governor of Rome on 22 October 1755, and helped him to get out of Rome the Muti Claude, Apollo and Admetus, assuring him that 'he would find means to get it out without any risque'.22 He tried to help John Parker in the Piranesi-Charlemont affair in 1758,23 see Charlemont. He watched over Gavin Hamilton, Nathaniel Dance, and Plimmer as they executed their commissions for James Grant, whom he advised over payments; when Dance asked £250 (for a composition he was not to complete, at least in Rome), Grant paid him £100, the balance to follow 'when the work is finishd. that being the genteel way of dealing with people of his profession' (12 Jul. 1760). Hamilton's Achilles lamenting the death of Patroclus, eventually finished in 1764, he judged to be 'the most perfect piece of painting that has been done by any, even the great masters, these several ages' (17 Feb. 1764); 'his only and great deficiency was in the colouring but here that too is admirable' (14 Dec. 1763). In 1771 the Pope sat to Hewetson 'by means of all powerful Abbé Grant'.24 Grant himself sat to Ramsay in 1755 (whose drawing alone survives; SNG), to Dance in 1764, the portrait judged 'very like',25 and to Angelica Kauffman (c.1763; SNPG); his portrait by H.D. Hamilton, which 'promised exceedingly well' was seen by John Ramsay in 1783,26 and his bust by Plura, taken in Rome, was shown posthumously at the RA in 1786. A miniature portrait of the Abbé was made by Tibaldi sometime before 1761 when he sent it to James Grant (7 Feb. 1761).In 1774 (the year after the suppression of the Jesuit Order) Grant was offered the post of Rector of the Scots College, but he declined it.2 His health was not good; for some years he had bad legs and in 1778 he broke a collar bone, which elicited from Father Thorpe the comment that 'his escapes from death are no less remarkable than his fortitude in undergoing so much good eating & drinking as he has done for many years successively'.27 Charles Parker remarked in 1783 how he 'still tottles about. He talks of ending his days in England having had better offers from his friends there, than from the Pope & all the Cardinals'.28 'I am still strong, and have mighty few symptoms of old age, there not being in my whole head as much as one grey hair', he told James Grant (14 Sep. 1782), as he set about raising his travel expenses; 'You know I was never ambitious, and consequently not rich, but, I thank God, I have and enjoy what will make me independent, my income being better than 90 pounds sterling a year', but perhaps James would help him in his special circumstances. And still the Abbé insisted he had never recovered from 'the untimely demise of his late Holyness, who, the very day he was taken ill, had appointed me to be with him in order to receive what he had prepar'd me, which was no small matter; it was to have been some high dignity, with a most suitable revenue for life'. He left Rome 'rather abruptly' on 18 March 1783, first handing over to his successor, John Thomson, the Mission documents. They were worm eaten. Thomson also discovered that Grant had sold his furniture to Joseph Denham, to whom he appeared to be in debt, and Mrs Denham occupied his apartments.29 He spent a year in Scotland during which his brother died. Deeply upset, he returned to Rome, where he arrived on 10 July 1784; Grant stayed with the widow of an old servant, but died on 1 September.30 Father Thorpe observed that he 'certainly did not die by any excess of ecclesiastical rigour'.31 Lord Bute, whose attentions had once so flattered the Abbé, erected a monument to him in the Scots College.

It appears there were two or three British residents in Rome by the name of Graves at the end of the century, all said to be related to Admiral Sir Thomas Graves of Thanckes, Cornwall. At present it seems impossible to disentangle their separate identities.A George Graves exported 'about 160' small pictures from Rome in July 1787.1 A Mr and Mrs Graves were noticed in Rome in November 1789,2 conceivably the 'Giorgio [Greny Grevy] Inglese - 40' and his wife 'Anna Caterina - 26' living in the Scesa di S.Giuseppe, Rome in 1792-3 and 1795.3 In February 1791 Whaley Armitage met Mr and Mrs Graves in Rome, finding them friendly and kind; Mr Graves collected Etruscan vases; on 17 May Mr Graves in Naples was about to embark for Greece and Egypt with Charles Berners and Henry Tilson.4 A manuscript account of a 'Tour from Rome to Sicily, Malta and the Coast of Africa: through most of the Islands of the Archipelago to Athens, Corinth and Asia Minor ... made in the years 1791 and 1792',5 formerly attributed to Frederick North, is now thought to be by Graves.6 In April 1793 Sir William Forbes met Graves in Rome, describing him as a relation of Admiral Graves, and one of a party who had been to Sicily, Egypt and the Archipelago.7 Lady Knight described him as 'a purser' in Rome who visited Egypt in 1792, leaving his wife in Rome, 'a pretty and a good sort of woman. I hear he left England for debts, and I know not what ... He is brother of the Admiral' [see William Graves] and had 'resided some time at Rome'; in August 1793 he was intending to return home.8 On 28 May 1793 in Rome Lady Webster saw some 'most accurately executed' drawings of oriental subjects, 'in the possession of a Mr Greaves who accompanied Messrs [Charles] Berners and [Henry] Tilson in their expedition into Greece, Asia Minor, and Egypt'.9 In May 1793 (i.e. at the same that Lady Webster saw the travel drawings) Lady Palmerston had seen a Mr Greves's collection of pictures in Rome: 'he has laid out an immense sum and as there are very few purchasers at present, he is, I believe, very much distressed. He had bought a most amazing fine collection of Guercino's, but he asks £1,000 for one, but I believe he would take half'.10 In 1797 Artaud mentioned a Mr Graves in Rome who had commissioned pictures from Kaisermann and Milner,11 and in March 1797 'Giorgio Graves' (accompanied by Miller) was buying antique marbles from Pacetti in Rome.12 Pictures belonging to a Mr George Graves were sold in 1803 (Christie's, 6 May), described as having been collected 'during many years residence at Rome and in different parts of Italy' and purchased 'from out of some of the most distinguished Palaces in the Papal Territory'. A 'Mr Greave' who died in London on 9 June 1802 aged seventy-five was then described as having been 'long known as a collector of prints and pictures'.13
In 1794 a Mr G. Graves, long a resident in Rome, was being considered as commercial representative for England in the Pope's dominions.1 He was possibly the Mr Greaves, an acquaintance of Sir William Hamilton and apparently a merchant, who in August 1796 was trying to come out to Rome from London.2 In July 1796 a Mr Graves with his wife and family were travelling from London through Primolano and Bassano to Venice;3 a Mr Graves was described as being the 'agente Britannico a Roma' in February 1797,4 and at the same time Mariana Starke mentioned the good offices of Mr Graves 'a Gentleman who acted as English Minister' in Rome.5

William Groves' was described as a dealer in Rome in 1796-7 and brother of the Admiral of that name [Thomas Graves (1725-1802)].1 He was possibly the William Graves in Padua on 18 May 1796.2
In February 1772 he was about to come to Florence with a Mr Musgrave, a young lawyer.1 On 30 April 1773 'Mosgre'[?] and 'Grevis' arrived in Venice with a Mr 'Svard'[?].2
From a prominent Huguenot merchant family, she was converted to Catholicism in 1764, as her two older sisters (then residing in a convent in Pisa) had already been; Anna took up residence in a religious house but, since she was under thirteen (the age below which conversions were not accepted in Tuscan law), she was forcibly sent back to England, where her mother had meanwhile taken another daughter (F. Avezzano Comes in Inglese a Livorno, 165-8).

He was attending the Academy in Turin by September 1764.1 In January 1765 Boswell met him in Turin, describing him as 'a good, brisk, little fellow',2 and he was still at the Academy in April.3

As a young man Sir James Gray made an extensive tour of Italy and the western Mediterranean, see Joseph Alston.Eleven years later, in 1744, Gray accompanied Lord Holderness on his embassy to Venice, where he arrived on 17 October 17441 (and visited Padua on 19 December).2 He remained at Venice until 1753, first as secretary (1744-6) and then as British resident. He attended in February 1745 the dinner given by Holderness for the Dilettanti Society, reporting afterwards to London, with Edward Clarke (another member), that he would 'have a peculiar attention to whatever may contribute to the prosperity and welfare of the Society'.3 But by 1752 Gray was complaining to Holderness that 'the solitude and subjection of this [diplomatic] post are become so heavy to me, that I am quite weary of it',4 and in 1753 he succeeded in being appointed envoy extraordinary at Naples. He had left Venice in August 1752, on leave, but did not return.Gray arrived in Naples on 18 December 1753, having sailed from Genoa, via Leghorn, and he presented his credentials on 1 January 1754.5 His promotion caused a flurry in the Mann-Walpole correspondence, since Gray's father had been merely 'first a box-keeper, and then footman to James II'.6 But Gray was soon discussing the designs of the new palace at Caserta with the young King, Ferdinand IV; 'tho I seldom have a great share in [royal conversation] when Dogs or hunting are the subject', wrote Gray to Lord Holderness, 'as architecture & antiquities are equally favorite topics I have my part'.7 Gray told Holderness of discoveries at Portici, explaining that 'when any thing curious is discovered, The King usually shews it to us after his Dinner'.8 Gray took particular interest in the excavations at Herculaneum, and throughout his stay in Italy he remained active in the promotion of the Society of Dilettanti, proposing many young travellers as suitable candidates for admission.9 He commissioned two views of Paestum by Joli (which were engraved for Thomas Major's Paestum [1768]).10 In 1759 Gray was appointed envoy extraordinary and plenipotentiary and was made KB. In April 1763 he was sailing to Marseilles, presumably on leave.11 His recall from Naples was dated 31 August 1764, but he was still there on 9 October and he had finally reached London by 22 January 1765.12 Two illegitimate children, James and Catherine, were born in Naples before he left.
John Gray described his tour of Italy in a letter to Tobias Smollett written from Genoa on 23 March 1771; he had previously visited Smollett at Leghorn, either in the autumn of 1770 or the spring of 1771. He had travelled from Venice to Milan earlier in March with Thomas Lyttlelton and he intended leaving Genoa early in April for Turin (L.M. Knapp, Smollett, 293. L. Melville, Life and Letters of Smollett, 243-7).

Gray's Letters during the course of a Tour through Germany, Switzerland and Italy in the years 1791 and 1792 [1797] are largely statutory displays of learning, but some of his political comments, given the period of his writing, hold some interest. Thus Turin was 'occupied entirely by military affairs and devotion' (236); no state in Europe seemed, in some respects, 'to be so ill-governed as Genoa' (261); at Parma he reflected that 'the expenditure of all the princes in Europe, like that of all the individuals in England, appears to exceed their revenues' (290-1), and at Bologna the 'Pope's viceregent exercises, by intrigue, more authority than he is constitutionally invested with by the state' (299). In Florence Gray stayed at Vanini's, since Megit's was full, and found the city admirable: 'trade and the fine arts seem to flourish there in union' and the Grand Duke Leopold deserved much praise (306). Less seriously, he heard La Corilla recite an impromptu sonnet on Mengs the painter (327). He stayed at Pio's in Rome and immediately his rooms were 'thronged with valets, tradesmen, and antiquarians, with recommendations from Mr Jenkins or his servants' (352). In Rome he observed that 'the French and English, indeed, are now the chief promoters and patrons of the fine arts' (369) and that British artists resided there 'rather to gratify their own taste than in expectation of present patronage' (371). Rome was 'very full of English, many of whom are lodged near each other in the Piazza di Spagna. They associate much together, preferring the company of their countrymen to being carried in crouds, under Mr Jenkins's protection, to concerts and conversaziones' (377). In Naples Gray confirmed the usual English judgment that the Neapolitan nobles 'do not stand high in their general character. Extremely uneducated, and holding literature in contempt, the men have little but their good humour to recommend them' (396).
The grand tour made by the young Gray and Horace Walpole (close friends at Eton and Cambridge) began with enthusiasm and ended with bitterness. Gray's introspection ultimately contrasted too much with the privileged Walpole's high spirits and worldliness, but it was Walpole, the younger of the two, who paid the bills and took the decisions.1Gray found the horrors of the Alpine crossing too dangerous 'to give one time to reflect upon their beauties' (16 Nov. 1739). In Turin the entertainments of the Carnival (from Christmas to Lent) provided him with only 'a slender diet' (ibid.), but he 'never beheld anything more amiable' than Genoa (21 Nov.). Parma had 'but a smoky & melancholy appearance' (Journal, 28 Nov.) and the Duke of Parma's pictures had been carried off to Naples by the King, but at Modena the Duke's pictures 'entertained us extremely well' (9 Dec.). At Bologna they saw 'churches, palaces, and pictures from morning to night' and in Florence they spent 'two or three hours every morning' in the 'famous gallery' (19 Dec.). Lent in Florence, wrote Gray, comprised 'a sermon in the morning, full of hell and the devil; a dinner at noon, full of fish and meager diet; and, in the evening, what is called a Conversazione, a sort of assembly at the principal people's houses, full of what I cannot tell' (19 Mar. 1740). The death of Pope Clement XII on 6 February and the ensuing Conclave lured them on to Rome. Gray was 'struck dumb with wonder' at St Peter's (2 Apr.), but soon he was telling his friend Richard West 'I am grown so used to be surprised, that I don't perceive any flutter in myself when I meet with any novelties; curiosity and astonishment wear off'; he discovered 'everything is neglected and falling to decay', and 'the palaces so ill kept, that half the pictures are spoiled by damp' (16 Apr.). At a Ball where Il Serenissimo Pretendente 'displayed his rueful length of person, with his two young ones', Gray sat in a corner with iced fruits 'and other pleasant rinfrescatives' (21 May). They visited Albano and Tivoli before passing on to Naples to witness the earliest excavations at Herculaneum. They saw their Sicilian Majesties to advantage, 'as ugly a pair as one can see'; 'She a pale girl, marked with small pox; and he a brown boy with a thin face, a huge nose, and as ungain as possible' (10 Jul.). They returned from Naples to Rome, but finding there was little likelihood of the Conclave making a choice within three months, passed on to Florence. Gray was not happy at leaving Rome for Florence which was, he said, 'an excellent place to employ all one's animal sensations in, but utterly contrary to one's rational powers' (31 Jul.). He had made a large collection of manuscript music and was composing in latin hexameters De Principis Cogitandi (while Walpole had little interest in music or Locke). Aware of their growing differences, Gray had reflected that travel had added to his personality 'two years of age, reasonable quantity of dullness, a great deal of silence, and something that rather resembles, than is, thinking' (21 Apr.), and Walpole later recalled his own insensibility and the fact that Gray's temper was not conciliatory.2 They left Florence with John Chute and Francis Whithed for Reggio, where the annual Fair brought out Walpole's highest spirits. There was a quarrel, and Gray set off for Venice with Chute and Whithed in May. Immediately afterwards Walpole, alone, was taken seriously ill and Gray was persuaded by Mann to return to Reggio; but he declined a reconciliation. Late in June both Gray and Walpole were in Venice, but apart. Gray was now without finances and had already borrowed from Joseph Smith in Venice, but Walpole contrived to supply an allowance anonymously through Horace Mann. Gray returned to England accompanied only by a laquais de voyage. He was home by 1 September, Walpole a fortnight later.The two were reconciled in 1745 and remained lifelong friends; Eccardt's portrait of Gray was one of the first to be commissioned for Strawberry Hill in 1747/8.

Bertie Greatheed was the nephew of the 3rdDuke of Ancaster (his mother was the daugh-ter of the 2nd Duke). He was in Florence with his wife in 1784 when, with William Parsonsand Robert Merry, he published verses in The Arno Miscellany. In June 1785 Greatheed and his wife met the Piozzis and with Parsons, Merry, John Biddulph and the 10th Earl of Pembroke formed a coterie, within which there was a particular friendship between Mrs Greatheed and Mrs Piozzi. That summer Greatheed, Parsons, Merry and Mrs Piozzi contributed to The Florence Miscellany, another poetic anthology with contributions from several Italian poets (see Hester Piozzi). The Greatheeds met the Piozzis in Naples that winter and Henry Quiin had noticed them in Rome by 1 April 1786.1 Dr Thomas Whalley met them in Florence in 1786 (probably about Easter) and in May they came from Perugia to Padua, thence sailing down the Brenta to Venice with the Piozzis, Charles Shard and Leonard Chappelow. By September the Greatheeds had left Lausanne for England.2 It was said that in Rome Greatheed had induced the Young Pretender to speak of the 1745 rising, 'but the emotion was too great and he [the Young Pretender] fell convulsed on the floor'.3 Greatheed was again in Italy in 1803-4, travelling with his only son, also Bertie Greatheed, who died in Vicenza in 1804, aged twenty-three (DNB).
In Rome Greatorex took singing lessons from Santarelli and he was well received by the Young Pretender, who was to bequeath him a manuscript volume of music (DNB). He was presumably the Greatorex who, with one Woodforde (possibly Samuel Woodforde), had been maltreated by a cafe owner in Naples sometime before November 1787 (ASN e 684).
On retiring from the English mission he went to Rome to teach English and to assist his own countrymen (Kirk). He was presumably the Abbé Green mentioned in Rome by Thomas Jones in 1779-80, John Ramsay in 1783 and Sarah Bentham in 1794 (Jones Memoirs, 90, 93. Ramsay jnl.mss, Jan., Mar. 1783. Bentham jnl.mss, 10 Feb. 1794).
The Mr Green noticed in Venice sometime between in November 1731 and February 17321 was conceivably the John Green whose account of the discovery of Herculaneum was communicated to the Royal Society in London by 'his partner' William Hammond in a letter dated Naples, 7 March 1732.2


Mr & Mrs Green lately come from Genoa' were in Pisa on 23 March and Leghorn on 28 March 1794; Mr Green had been resident consul at Nice from at least 1788.1 'Green, consul at Nice', was again in Pisa on January 1795.2 He had married Betsy Watson at Turin in October 1788 (see Laetitia Houblon). He was conceivably Nathaniel Green, the friend of John Strange, who had been consul at Trieste, see Green 1782.
At Easter 1753 Greenhill was living with Stephen Beckingham on the Strada della Croce.1 He commissioned three plaster busts from Vierpyl.2


In July 1778 'young Mr Greenwood', who was 'not said to apply much to his study' was living in Rome with Dom Placid Waters who was acting as his governor.1 Waters sent him to Paris in 1779: 'it was high time', said Father Thorpe; 'they had long been heartily tired of each other'.2 Waters referred to him as Charles Greenwood of Brize Norton in his letters.3
He succeeded John Fuller as consul in Leghorn in 1721.1 By the spring of 1723 he had become consumptive; he moved to Naples, where he died on 20 August.2





George Grenville was in Italy with Lord Bulkeley (under whose name their tour is described). Grenville wrote to his uncle and guardian Lord Temple from Naples on 26 March 1774 with a lengthy description of the city and announcing that he had 'taken the liberty of sending you a Vase of the lava of the year 1771; it is intended for a chimney-piece'.1 Grenville made several purchases in Italy: 'I have not been insensible to the opportunities of enriching myself and my country with the spoils of Roman grandeur', he wrote to Morton Pitt from Bologna in May 1774; 'I shall hope to show you a collection of marbles ... inferior to few north of the Alps'.2 His acquisitions included a statue of the Knidian Aphrodite, 'an Adonis of uncommon beauty', a Paris and the statue of a woman, all bought from Gavin Hamilton. Two of his antique vases (one excavated by Hamilton at Hadrian's Villa in 17693) appeared, with fulsome dedications, in Piranesi's Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778]. Grenville commissioned a chimneypiece from Piranesi (now in Benham Place, Speen, Berks),4 and a relief of Caractacus before Claudius from Thomas Banks (Stowe), for which he was slow to pay the agreed £2005 (according to Horace Walpole, Grenville had a 'natural propensity to avarice').
Grenville stayed three months in Italy with his wife while on his way to Constantinople, where he had been appointed ambassador. They arrived in Turin on 16 October and were presented at Court the next day.1 In Rome their daughter Louisa (1758-1829, later Lady Stanhope) sat to Batoni; Jenkins wrote in November 1761 that Batoni had 'made a very pretty picture of Miss Grenville, its intended for Lord Temple' (Clark/Bowron 238; Chevening). They were in Naples from 17 November 1761 to 24 January 1762, when they embarked, taking Lord Warkworth with them.2
After he left Eton in 1729 Richard Grenville was sent at the age of eighteen to travel in Switzerland, Italy and France, in the care of M. de Lizy, and he stayed abroad more than four years.1 He was in Padua on 4 March 17312 and he sat to Rosalba Carriera in Venice (according to an old label, at the age of nineteen and a half, i.e. in March 1731); the portrait (formerly at Nuneham) was given to his mother.3 He also bought in Italy for his uncle and benefactor, Lord Cobham, two tables of 'gallio antiquo', two paintings by Panini and two large landscapes by Orizzonte. On 18 November 1732 he paid a Mr Worthington 'to remitt to my banker of Leghorn for pictures etc. £90.2.8'. He continued to buy works of art in Italy after his return to England; in 1740/1 he paid Mr Jackson in Leghorn £69.6.10 for four pictures.4




Once described as a 'queer compound of the Pharisee and the Publican, something between a Charles and a Joseph Surface',1 the nineteen-year-old Greville first visited Italy in 1768-9. He was in Rome in November 17682 and then stayed with his uncle, William Hamilton, in Naples. Their friendship, based on a common love of antiquity and virtù, was to have far-reaching consequences. In March 1769 Greville was back in Rome, 'running about the antiquities from 9 to 11 with Byers [James Byres] and from 11 to 2 with Miss A'3 -possibly Anne Forbes, from whom he commissioned two pictures (probably copies).4 He was in Venice on 12 May;5 his uncle later wrote to him that he could 'conceive that a gondola with a fine woman in it must seem a most luxurious conveyance for a young man in his prime'.6 Greville was in Vienna in October.7Greville returned to Italy very briefly in 1775. He set out in July, and spent two weeks in Naples in September.8 He was reported in Florence on 7 October9 and was in London again by the end of the month.10 Immediately after his return Hamilton was writing to him about 'the poor man we employ'd about the pictures of Boranello'; he had bought for Greville two pictures by Calabresi; 'I shall send a picture or two of mine with yours' and adds a postcript that 'if you like to have the other Mater Dolorosa we saw together, let me know; about 100 D's. will purchase it. Call'd Spagnolette, and under a glass'.11 Greville, despite his relatively modest finances, collected throughout his life, and his uncle (conceivably in gratitude for Emma Hart, whom he had received from Greville in 1786, see William Hamilton) called him one of the three great connoisseurs of the arts in England (the others being Charles Townley and William Lock).12 Greville's collection, sold at Christie's in March-April 1810, was then described as designed to illustrate 'the progress of Painting'; it contained a remarkable number of Italian primitives (called Cimabue, Giotto, Masaccio, etc) of which a 'Masaccio' (now NG London as Spinello) had been bought from Patch in Florence. Among his antique sculpture was a Bacchante from Gavin Hamilton, later bought by Townley some years before the Greville sale.13
According to Thomas Brand who met him in Naples, Charles Greville was 'a specimen of the London fine gentleman,' but one 'who appears to have been designed by nature for something much better. Even fashion and affectation have not quite spoiled him'.1 He was in Italy with Lady Hervey (the wife of John, Lord Hervey) and Mr Hervey, presumably her brother-in-law, Frederick William Hervey. They were in Lausanne in August 1792,2 and in Naples in November, when Brand said Greville was to return immediately to England with Hervey.1 Greville was in Rome in December and by April he was said to have gone to Gibraltar3‚ but he was married in England on 31 March 1793.
Of high birth and with 'a splendid fortune', Greville took his wife, Frances, a beauty and a poetess, to Italy in 1756-7. They took their infant daughter [Frances Anne, who became Mrs John Crewe] and were accompanied by Richard Phelps. They stayed in Florence in October and Rome in November 1756. In December the Grevilles went on to Naples, and Phelps appears to have left them, see Phelps. George Lucy met Greville sight seeing in Rome on 24 November and wrote on 27 December that the Grevilles were soon going away from Naples.1 By May 1757 they were in Venice, and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu mentioned 'Mr Greville, his Lady and her suite of adorers' in October as having been in Venice that year; Fulke Greville had presented her with a copy of his curious book of Maxims [1756].2
Lord Greville arrived in Naples in December 1766,1 and he may be identified as the 'Milord Previll' who arrived in Venice on 23 May 1767.2 According to the Royal Register [1780, 129] 'his travels did not in any great degree either improve or corrupt him, and he has since remained a quiet inoffensive character'.

Little is known of Charles Grey's grand tour. Charles Grey travelled in Europe, initially in the suite of the Duke of Cumberland. Lord Bulkeley, who had first met him in Vienna, encountered him, generally in the company of Mark Davis, at Florence in November 1785, at Naples in January 1786 and Rome in February, see Thomas, 7th Viscount Bulkeley. At Naples Grey was in the suite of the Duke of Cumberland. His tour was cut short when the death of the Duke of Northumberland (June 1786) left a parliamentary seat open for him, to which he was elected in July 1786, before his return (C. Grey, Some Account of ... Charles, 2nd Earl Grey, 2. Commons, 2, 2:552).
Lord Grey was in Italy with Sir Henry Mainwaring (whose travel diary survives in a priv. coll.; NRA4799/43). On 9 February 1760 they arrived from Naples in Rome and they were presumably the 'Milord Gre' and his 'Cavaliere Campagno Inglese' listed as staying near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter.1 Grey commissioned views of Rome and Naples from John Plimmer2 and sat to Mengs (Dunham Massey), but it was the Dance brothers whom he and Mainwaring particularly favoured. Together they sat to Nathaniel Dance for a portrait dated 1760 which was copied by Mengs's daughter the same year, and both Grey and Mainwaring commissioned from him a Virgilian subject. Grey chose Dido and Aeneas (Tate Gallery), which was nearly complete in November 1764, and Mainwaring Aeneas and Venus (Christie's, 23 May 1994) which was nearing completion in October 1761. George Dance said his brother was painting for 'Mr Mainwaring' on 4 October 1760.3 Mainwaring also commissioned two marble chimneypieces from George Dance, which were executed in Florence.4 During the summer of 1760 Grey and Mainwaring were based in Florence (where Joseph Wilcocks and Thomas Jenkins went to meet Mainwaring and Thomas Wynn in July, see Wilcocks). Grey commissioned two paintings from Patch (both at Dunham Massey), a Punch Party of 1760, which includes both Grey and Mainwaring, and the Antiquaries at Pola of 1760, commemorating an excursion they undertook with Jacob Houblon and his tutor Jonathan Lipyeatt, see Houblon. Grey and Mainwaring were also included in a second Punch Party by Patch of 1761 (Chatsworth). Grey was in Turin in November 1760.5
Lord Grey travelled with a tutor, Mr Pidow. He was in Rome in December 1787,1 and in March 1788, when he was staying at the Corcelli in Naples,2 Lord Gardenstone described him as one of 'several young heirs of distinguished British families' whose 'sense and good manners do credit to themselves and honour to their country'.3 In June Lord Grey and Pidow were in Milan.4
Ralph Grey sat to Batoni in Rome, the portrait dated 1775 (Clark/Bowron 386; priv. coll.). His father replied to his letter from Rome of 15 December 1774, saying that he 'did not know that the Italians were reckoned good portrait painters for the likeness', but when he saw his son's portrait in June 1776 he thought it 'very good' and 'vastly like'.1 Grey's visit to Rome is further documented in the unpublished diaries of Sir Roger Newdigate.2


Lord Grey de Wilton first went to Italy at the age of thirty-five, setting out five months after he had been ennobled on resigning his Lancashire seat in Parliament. He was accompanied by a Mr Vincent Foxley. Grey's prosaic travel journal (Grey jnl.mss 1) contains their itinerary and lists the principal sites in some detail. They sailed from Nice to Genoa where they stayed at the Hotel du Grand Cerf, continuing five days later in the same felucca to Lerici. In Florence they stayed ten days at the Hotel Carlo 'kept by an Englishman by the name of Marget [Megit]'; 'Mons Jean Figliazzi' took them to the Palazzo Pitti, and at a masked ball they saw the Young Pretender, 'wore down with age' and his daughter, who had 'a good person and is lively'; Nardini's playing on the violin 'at Mr Biddulph's' Grey found 'superior to any I ever heard, Giardini excepted' and his principal cultural interest appears to have been in music. From Florence they passed through Rome to Naples where they stayed at the Crocelli hotel, close by the sea. Clarke [doubtless James Clark] was their cicerone and their sight-seeing during their two-and-a-half-week stay was relentless, interrupted only by bad weather. They spent five weeks in Rome in March-April 'at the English Taylors in the Piazza d'Espagna'. James Byres was their cicerone, [Christopher] Norton standing in for him on two days when he was not well; the course lasted from 11 March to 14 April and Grey's notes fill 74 pages of his journal. Byres showed them Poussin's Seven Sacraments in the Bonapaduli Palace, which he was about to buy and replace with copies. They visited the studios of several artists: Ducros, the eighty-year-old Batoni, Philipp Hackert, Jacob More, Tresham and Pichler, the German gem-engraver. On 31 March they dined with Thomas Jenkins. Grey commissioned four drawings from Jacob More through Byres, for which he paid 'Mr Edgar to answer a Draft of Mr Nortons from Rome for 4 of Moors Drawings £17.10' on 29 August 1787.1 More recorded the four drawings (views in Rome and the Campagna) as finished on 20 June 1787 (Heaton Hall sale, 2 Jun. 1902).2 At the conclusion of his first tour Grey noted that he had travelled 4,386 miles, a statement characteristic of his journal.Three years later he spent two months in northern Italy with his wife and daughter (also called Eleanor). A second Grey travel journal (Grey jnl.mss 2) gives the complete itinerary, but the terse commentary stops at Parma on 20 May; again the distances travelled were recorded, the whole tour amounting to 3,374 miles.


The Irish commander of the town of Piacenza; formerly an officer in the Spanish service, he had known the Jacobite Lord Marischal; Boswell found him 'a good, jolly, sensible man'.1 'Il Conte Davide Griffith di nazione irlandese' died in Piacenza on 8 January 1783 when in his seventies.2


(His name was sometimes written Grignon but, for example, he appears as Grignion in the RA registers). Following the award of a gold medal for painting in 1776, Grignion was given a Royal Academy travelling scholarship for three years in October 1781. He reached Rome (with Robert Fagan) that December, and stayed in Italy for the rest of his life (at Easter 1782 he was living in the Via Babuino, where he stayed until 1785; in 1787 'Monsieur Grillon', painter aged 31 was staying with the sculptor Cavaceppi in the Strada Laurina).1 He failed to fulfill his early promise as a painter and was characterised by his friend and biographer George Cumberland as 'humane, studious, but slow in his studies, and rather inclined to melancholy.'2His first undertaking was a large history picture Captain Cook attacked by the Natives which, said Cumberland, might never have been completed without the entreaties of the Abbé Grant. It was sent off to London in September 1783 for exhibition at the RA the following year, and in announcing its dispatch, Grignion alleged to Sir William Chambers that he was 'always employed'.3 Another large history piece, Prometheus chained to the Rock was undertaken for the 2nd Baron Clive, with whom Grignion was on terms of some familiarity in Rome and Florence in the spring of 1787. But the Prometheus remained unfinished, despite elaborate preparatory studies: 'all the museums were ransacked', Cumberland recalled; 'old prints studied, and, above all, the Monte-Cavallo Colossus daily perused, a number of sketches made, and each submitted in turn to Deare's [John Deare the sculptor] inspection ... it was even modelled in clay, and at last was got on to the canvas, a score of pentimenti [marking] his indecision and anxiety'; only a finished study arrived in London.2 But Grignion's portrait of Lord Clive's sister Charlotte, dated Rome 1787, remains at Powis Castle.Charles Long told Cumberland that Grignion was 'a sensible fellow but falls a little short in the execution of his painting. I shd recommend him to turn Antiquary instead of Painter'.4 But he persisted as an artist. In 1791 John Penn commissioned him to make drawings 'of the most celebrated Greek marbles, of a Colossal size', and the following year he embarked on a third major history piece, Homer reading his Poems at the Tomb of Achilles, for the young Lord Berwick.2 Two subjects from Euripides were given him by Edward Clarke, Berwick's adviser, who noticed in Grignion's studio some illustrations to Milton 'far advanced, and very valuable'.2 These were for Sir Corbet Corbet, whose portrait Grignion had painted by December 1793, and it was on Corbet's strong recommendation that Sarah Bentham and her son were shown round Rome by Grignion.5 In 1790 Grignion was listed at Rome as a history painter living in the 'Strada Laurina the Sixth house from the Strada del Babuino on the left hand', and in 1793 at the same address as a history and portrait painter (Rome Lists); in April 1794 he signed (as Charles Grignon) the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus from English artists in Rome (Rome List 1794). Grignion appears to have been popular among British artists in Rome. He spent some time introducing Charles Long to them6 and made a series of caricatures of his fellow artists for which the Abbate Leonetti wrote satirical Italian verses. Only Jacob More took offence.7 In January 1796 Grignion described to Cumberland the insecurity felt by British artists in Rome as the French armies entered Italy.8 But he appears to have stayed on. With his friend Robert Fagan he succeeded in buying the two celebrated Claudes from the blind Prince Altieri who, like other Roman princes, was anxious to sell his pictures rather than have them forcibly requisitioned by Napoleon. Early in 1799 Fagan and Grignion had asked James Irvine, then in London, to act as their agent, but his services were to be ignored.9 The Altieri Claudes were shipped back to Falmouth in 1799 with an armed escort, thanks to Lord Nelson,10 whom Grignion had met in Palermo on 7 February 1799 according to the inscription on his pencil sketch of Nelson's head (Royal United Services Institution). It was not until 10 August 1799 that Grignion finally left Rome, leaving Lord Berwick's Homer reciting 'in his study in the Vineyards, where he occupied the house of Raphael'.2 He went to Leghorn, where he arrived on 21 August.2 Grignion appears to have settled there and to have turned to landscape painting. In his memoir Cumberland said that while Grignion's chief study had been 'the antique, and composition' it had latterly been landscape, and 'even botanical studies will be found in his portfolio'.2 Cumberland also recounted that in Leghorn Grignion had bought an altarpiece, intending to replace it with one by himself of Elijah ascending in his Chariot. But when he died of fever in Leghorn on 4 November 1804 it was not finished. Grignion was buried in Leghorn.2
Grimston travelled with his Eton and Cambridge contemporary Thomas de Grey. They attended the Academy at Turin, where they arrived on 8 December 1770,1 Grimston paying for six month's residence on the 18th.2 Sir William Lynch had told Horace Mann on 15 December that de Grey and Grimston were 'the only two English' in Turin.3 De Grey, and presumably Grimston, left Turin on 18 May 1771. They were introduced to society at Vicenza through a letter from Thomas Lyttelton to 'Madame la Comtesse Tresina', written at Turin on 15 May.4 On 30 May 1771 de Grey was called back to England from Pavia, and the companions were separated. Grimston was in Milan in June and progressed through Bologna to Florence and Siena, where he had an affair with one Caterina Azzoni, the daughter of the family with whom he was staying. In Rome he stayed from at least 10 November 1771 to 18 January 1772 with the merchant Barazzi's family; it was on 10 November that he received an audience from the Pope, 'one of the most affable men'.5 He was much taken by the 'exceedingly clever' Piranesi, and on 1 December he paid 300 livres for 'les Estampes de Piranèse';6 he sat to Batoni (Clark/ Bowron 342; Gorhambury), to whom he paid 410 sequins on 14 January and 43 ducats on 18 February, by which time he was in Naples. He stayed until at least 2 March, before returning home via Padua. In Naples he appears to have purchased works by Pietro Fabris.7
Although Grimston had left England under doctor's orders, he told his parents that he intended 'to polish myself so far that when I come home again you shall all wonder and say Is this the clownish school Boy, whom I knew two years ago.'1 He set out in December 1765, spending a year in France with J.-B. Durade, the French print dealer, with whom he quarrelled. Grimston then proceeded to Italy with Mr and Mrs Swinburn whom he had met at Aix. On 1 January 1767 he wrote to his guardian from Turin, saying how kind Mrs Swinburn was. He attended the Academy at Turin for several months, leaving in September for Milan, and travelling through Genoa and Florence to Rome. On 30 March 1768 he told his guardian he had spent 'these last four months in Rome'; he sat for a full-length portrait to 'the best painter here & who is now reckond as good a painter as any in Europe'-presumably Maron, whose whole-length portrait of Grimston, dated 1768, is at Sledmere.2 'Roberto Grimston' applied for the export from Rome of 23 paintings (6 modern, two by Orizzonte, the others old masters) on 7 May 1768.3 He did not like the Romans; 'was it not for the great resource of one's own Countrymen & the many immense fine things that are contained in it [Rome] in regard to Society would be the most disagreeable place in the world'. But he enjoyed the Carnival, masking himself one day in woman's clothes; he judged the Pope to be 'a very good natured old man', and he saw the 'poor unhappy Chevalier De St George'. In Rome he shared apartments with Thomas Noel (later Viscount Wentworth) and Thomas Hooke, and said that he and Sir John Blois had made 'all the tour together'. They had intended to go together to Naples, but instead Grimston left Rome with Hooke and Noel. They were in Turin by 22 June, having spent two or three weeks in Venice; Hooke was then ill and the party did not expect to resume their homeward journey for another two weeks. In this, his last letter to his guardian, Grimston reflected that 'not even two years & a half that I have been rolling about, can give me a sufficient Impudence to fancy that I am wise or know more than all the world besides myself, which a young man generally does, after coming home from abroad'.In 1792-4 his two (orphaned) daughters, Maria (who m. Hawkesworth Fawkes in 1794) and Lucy (who m. Sir Robert Wilmot in 1796), were in Italy with Sir John Legard.

Grimston set out on his tour in April 1777.1 He delivered a letter from Poyntz in Turin to Collet in Genoa in December 1778.2 In 1779 he sat to Batoni in Rome (Clark/Bowron 419; priv. coll.). He had returned to England by February 1780 when he married his cousin.

On 12 January 1774 'una magnifica e sontuosa festa' was held in Siena in the house of 'Sigg. Cavalieri [Sir William] Cunynghame, [John] Blagrove e Grinfield'.1 In 1781 Grinfield was reported as 'building a villa within a mile of [Siena] & is fix'd for life'.2 His 'elegant villa wholly in the English style', was completed in 1788 when Lord Gardenstone met him, describing him as 'a British gentleman, much esteeemed' who had a collection of Natural History but 'was so bountiful ... that he can never form a cabinet' (he urged Gardenstone to take whatever he liked).3 Brooke met him in 1794, describing him as 'brother to the General, a worthy man; he seems perfectly happy ... his house is about two miles from [Siena], which is occupied sometime by his friend, a Lady, the wife of a Nobleman in Siena, to whom he is cicisbeo'.4 Grinfield died in Siena in 1808 and was buried at Leghorn.5

Sir Richard Grosvenor was in Geneva with his governor Alexander Forrester before entering Italy, where he was described as being one of the wild set with William Wyndham (his future brother-in-law) and Simon Harcourt.1 They were in Padua in April/May 17062 and Grosvenor was noticed that summer in Florence, studying art.3 Forrester was in Padua on his own in October 1709.4
Accompanied by a Mr Sparrow, he came to Italy by way of Turin,1 and died in Naples on 31 January 1733.2 A Dr Tomlinson, a London physician, was then attending him.

Grove was secretary to Admiral Medley who died in Florence on 5 August 1747. Grove also was then ill, but he recovered, and in March 1748 was in Savona trying to compose the Admiral's debts (Wal.Corr., 19:433 and n14, 15).

J.T. Groves is said to have been in Italy between 1780 and 1790; his portrait by Francis Wheatley was shown in 1790 at the RA, and in 1791 he exhibited a view of the Temple of the Sybil at Tivoli.1 He was elected to the Accademia del Disegno in Florence on 11 September 1794,2 undoubtedly in his absence.3 He was possibly the 'Monsu Groves' staying in Rome with his brother Frederick in 1786, see Frederick Groves.


A few days after arriving from Naples, 'Le Major B. Guidet Anglois' died in Rome of malaria, and was buried near the pyramid of Cestius (SP 85/15, f.105; Walton, 6 Jul. 1726).
John Guye' arrived in Rome in November 1724 with Christopher Milles.1 Both were Jacobites and Stosch believed that 'Guise MP' and 'Mills son of the Chevalier Jean Mills MP' were the masked men who had dined secretly by night with the Pretender in December.2 By 24 February 1725 they had left for Naples.3
Travelling with a tutor, Johann Rudolf Valtravers, Guise was received by Horace Mann in Florence in April/May 1753, Mann noticing that 'the town calls [him] my nephew, though he announced himself only my cousin'.1 He was one of several Englishmen with whom Mann welcomed to Florence Prince Karl Andrew of Brandenberg-Anspach, Queen Caroline's grand-nephew. In October Guise and Valtravers were expected in Rome,2 and they were in Capua on 29 October,3 presumably on their way to Naples.
Guise had come to Lausanne in October 1762. In May 1763 Edward Gibbon moved into the same pension and they decided to travel together in Italy. Gibbon described Guise as 'very sensible well-bred man' who had seen a great deal of the world, and the two journeyed in 'great harmony and good humour'.1 Some extracts from Guise's Journal are published, supplementing Gibbon's account2 and they include a description of the Feast of S.John in Florence on 29 June. Sir William Farington saw Guise (but did not mention Gibbon) on his return journey in Bologna on 25 March 17653 and Gibbon left Guise at Lyons. Back in England Guise became a member of Gibbon's Roman Club.4

On 15 January 1725 Gumley visited the Palazzo Barberini with Rawlinson, and on 21 January Rawlinson with 'Capt Gumley of Port Mahon and his companion' left Rome for Leghorn (Rawlinson jnl.mss, 15, 21 Jan. 1725).
Gunn first visited Italy for his health in 1785 when he was thirty five. He sailed from Nice to Genoa and went on to Pisa,1 where he wrote on 25 February describing the 'magnificent city' of Genoa and the 'solitary Grandeur' of Pisa. His stay in Pisa was enlivened by the arrival of Anthony Aufrere, the distressed but high-spirited Norfolk squire, to whom he acted as adviser. They were in Florence together, before Gunn went on alone to Rome early in April. He attended the 'splendid Pantomimes' of Holy Week (but was deeply moved by the 'Misererios'). He was received by the Pope, and enjoyed introductions to Cardinal de Bernis, whose luxurious entertainments led him to reflect on the shocking contrast they provided with the poverty of the homeless in the Roman streets. His visit to Rome was not long. Later in April he was about to leave, considering 'Pisa my Head Quarters', but he had visited Naples before returning to Norfolk by the autumn of 1785. Gunn kept in touch with Aufrere in Italy and with Thomas Hill, the chaplain to the British Factory at Leghorn (whom he had met in Pisa), and his collection of Italian books and prints grew. On his second visit Gunn took his young wife and small daughter, Marianne. They left England in May 1792 and, passing through revolutionary France, entered Italy from Nice through Turin. In Bologna they were taken ill, and they spent an unhappy ten days in Florence before arriving in Rome on 12 October. They were to remain there until the following April, staying first on the Strada delle Orsoline (in lodgings found by Patrick Moir), and then in rooms in the Strada Condotta. On 18 November Gunn saw high mass celebrated in St Peter's by Cardinal York and that same evening he attended a reception given by the young Prince Augustus, with whom he subsequently became well acquainted. Gunn pursued antiquarian interests: he studied Roman mosaics and sought British historical documents in the Vatican. He described the difficulties this involved and the suspicions it aroused (but his efforts bore some fruit as his subsequent publications showed). Prince Augustus suggested that Gunn would be a suitable person to negotiate the acquisition of the Stuart papers from the Cancellaria, but nothing came of the suggestion. Gunn was elected to the Society of the Arcadians, and he formed a lasting friendship with Flaxman (whose portrait drawing of Gunn was lithographed by Lane in 1810). Gunn acquired some old master paintings and drawings, and he commissioned several water-colour copies of old masters from Fritz Bury [Federigo Buri], a German artist-dealer whose drawing of Marianne Gunn remains with the Gunn family. While at Rome Gunn was told that the most-copied pictures in the Capitol were Guercino's Sybilla Persica and Guido Reni's Fortune. On 4 April 1793 Gunn was asked to call at the lodgings of Prince Augustus where 'he found the Prince, Lady Augusta Murray and a Prayer Book. He read the necessary office, and made out a marriage certificate which he undertook never to give up to anybody under any circumstances. The three of them swore to keep the marriage, and Gunn's part in it, a secret'. Gunn ran a considerable risk, for the marriage ran counter to the Royal Marriages Act of 1772. Lady Knight was among those distressed by the clandestine marriage: Gunn had been recommended to her 'but I saw very little of him after he got into the gay set, and I did not think myself wanted when his wife, who had been very ill, got well'.2 At the end of April the family spent three weeks in Naples. Gunn found the pictures at the Capodimonte better arranged than in 1785, and he admired the Etruscan vases at the 'King's Porcelain Factory' (they probably acquired the pieces of Etruscan pottery which they brought back to England at this time). They were back in Rome in May, and visited several of the small towns of Latium as the heat grew. Gunn continued filling his notebooks with observations on art until they finally left Rome in August. As they progressed northwards, Gunn reflected on the wretched state of the peasantry in the Campagna. They passed through Loreto, Ancona, Bologna (two days in which Gunn exalted in Guercino) and Venice,3 where he remarked that 'many of the Pictures ... are blackened by Time to an invisibility'. He recorded his admiration of Perugino at Bologna and, more surprisingly, of Giotto at Padua. They came home via Germany and Holland, reaching Harwich in October 1793.Gunn's scrapbook of his continental travels, containing passports, visiting cards, topographical prints and water-colours, remains in a private collection.


On 6 April 1763 James Gray in Naples recommended to Horace Mann in Florence 'Monsr Phillip Gunther, a Scholar of Mengs who comes to Florence to perfect himself in his art, in which he has already made a great proficiency, & copies extremely well, & in which he has been employed by Mr [Robert] Strange'; Gray owned a copy by him after Schidone (SP 105/315, f.86).






Hackman was evidently a well-known eccentric in the later eighteenth century. Joseph Mercer saw him in Naples in February 1779,1 and Thomas Jones described him in Rome the following July as 'Hackman the pedestrian'.2 Betsey Wynne met him in Waldeck in Switzerland in December 1792: 'This is a man of 55 years old which is foolish and much to be pitied'; she alleged he was Thomas Elliot Hackman, whose son James Hackman had shot the singer Martha Ray outside Covent Garden in 1779; when he was hanged 'the Father turned almost mad and ever since travels always on foot'; he had left England fifteen years before, had been to Russia and almost all of Europe, and was going to Milan, Sicily and Portugal before returning to England.3 A Mr Hackman called on the Flaxmans in Rome in April 1793.4 Hackman was in Naples in April 1794, when he told Brooke that he 'walked on and took no notice of anything'.5 Betsey Wynne met him again in Florence in April 1796, 'as dull, as stupid as he was before. Although he cannot hardly walk he wants to continue his journey round Europe on foot. He is now going to Leghorn by thence he'll go straight to Gibraltar will spend next winter at Lisbon and then return to England. He is a very extraordinary man, looks like a beggar, nobody knows who he is all the English sees him but thinks him a great boare'.6

Lord Haddo was in Florence on 12 December 1774 when he first met Sir Roger Newdigate. They met again in Siena on 20 December with a Mr Livingston; on 26 December Haddo and Livingston reached Rome and frequently met Newdigate there (for dinner or Sunday prayers) until April 1775; occasionally James Byres would join their party.1 Haddo sat to Batoni for a whole-length portrait, in which the surrounding statuary suggests a serious interest in antiquity (Haddo House; Clark/Bowron 385). On 2 May 1775 'Milord Addo' arrived in Venice with 'Miledi Green' and 'Miledi Kooches'[?].2
Hadfield's hotel in Florence, variously referred to as 'Carlo's', 'Hadfield's' or 'Hatfield's', became celebrated among English travellers in the later eighteenth century. His daughter explained (in an autobiographical letter written in 1830, at the end of her life1) that having found only bad accomodation for travellers in Italy, he had taken a large house in Florence, furnishing it 'quite in the English manner' as a hotel. Eventually he had three hotels 'quite near each other', the main establishment being 'a few doors from the English Envoy [Horace Mann] & near the Palace & gardens of the great Duke'.2 Another was 'near the Capuchin's Convt. abt. a Mile from the Porta S. Gallo in a pleasant situation & has a Fine View on every Side',3 and there was also 'his Country House', the Palazzo Bruciato near Fiesole, where in 1768 Hadfield organised for Sir Watkin Williams Wynn the grand entertainment to mark Mann's investiture as Knight of the Bath.4  Hadfield came from a rich family in Manchester1 and had come to Florence in about 1746 (in 1774 he was described as having been a hotelier in Florence for twenty-eight years).2 He was apparently a convivial host; he is portrayed as a muscular figure holding aloft a bowl of punch in Patch's Punch Party of 1760 (Dunham Massey), and in 1762 Mrs Craster called him 'a saucy, imposing man'.5 His daughter Maria said that he had 'a great taste & knowledge of the Arts & Sciences',1 and letters from Charles Townley indicate that Hadfield acted as an agent for handling works of art, besides owning good pictures himself.6 At least three of his five surviving children (Maria, George and William) were accomplished in the fine arts.  Charles died in November 1776, having made Horace Mann and Sir John Dick his executors.7 His widow continued with the hotels until June 1779, when 'Hadsfield Vedova Elisabetta' and four of her children (less William), were issued with passports to leave Florence for London.8 They returned to England with Thomas Banks and his wife, and the principal hotel in Florence was taken over by Megit.


George Hadfield was included on the Hadfield family passport issued on 14 June 1779.1 His training and work in London during the 1780s was likely to have been encouraged by his elder sister, Maria, who married the artist Richard Cosway in 1781. Hadfield was awarded the Rome scholarship in 1790, his application supported by Mary Moser: 'it was Miss M's decision that he be sent to Italy to study Architecture'.2  Having travelled out to Italy with his sister, Maria Cosway, in 1790, he left her at Venice and travelled on to Rome to take up the pension worth £60 per annum.3 During 1791 he made a notable series of drawings of the Roman temple dedicated to Fortuna at Palestrina (Praeneste).4 He was listed in Rome in 1793 as an architect living on the 'Strada Felice the corner of the Vicolo de'Cappuccini' and in April 1794 he signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus from the English artists at Rome (Rome Lists 1793, 1794). While in Rome, he designed two elaborate chimneypieces which Charles Tatham described to Henry Holland in February 1795: 'the Architecture of the work, as designed by Hatfield [sic], a late student here & pupil of M. Wyatts, differs widely from the modern style - and I dare say will not altogether accord with your taste'. This chimneypiece was executed by the sculptor John Deare and bought by Prince Augustus for £350. In June 1795 Tatham commented on 'two statuary marble Chimney pieces' which were also made up by Deare and bought by Prince Augustus for about £150 each, but which were intended for his brother the Prince of Wales-'as Hatfield was the director of the Architectural part of these also, they are much in the same style, widely differing from what we call French, as they stand high with but little projection from the Wall'.5 After returning to London late in 1794 Hadfield failed to become a member of the Architects' Club, despite the support of Holland and Wyatt (the latter speaking highly of Hadfield's manners and promising abilities).6
The talented daughter of the hotelier Charles Hadfield, Maria was educated in a convent in Florence; she began to study music at the age of six and drawing at ten.1 She was copying in the Uffizi as the pupil of Viollante Cerroti and Zoffany from 1773, and on 27 September 1778 was elected to the Accademia del Disegno.2 Wright of Derby noticed her work and she met the engraver Charles Townley, Edward Edwards and Henry Tresham, all of whom she mentioned in letters written in Italian to Ozias Humphry in 1775-6.3 She was also then already regarded as a reliable judge of current musical performances and in 1777 was arranging for musical scores to be sent to Humphry in London.4 By September 1775 William Parsons, the English musician who had spent some time in Rome, came to Florence and gave her lessons. Early in 1777, sometime after his return to London, he wrote proposing marriage;5 on 8 March Mrs Hadfield wrote to Maria, who was then apparently in Rome, passing on Parsons's offer, but nothing came of it.6  This was probably Maria's first visit to Rome, although late in her life she recalled having been more than once between 1774 and 1778.7 According to Thomas Jones she came with her mother and brother [William] in 'about' July 1777.8 They soon returned to Florence where Joseph Mercer, a young English traveller, took a particular fancy to her in December 1778; he was upset when Maria and William set off for Rome on 13 December.9 On this occasion Maria stayed with Thomas Banks and his wife, and she 'had the opportunity of knowing all the first living Artists intimately; Battoni, Mengs, Maron, and many English Artists. Fusely with his extraordinary visions struck my fancy. I made no regular study, but for one year and a half only [i.e. her separate visits to Rome combined] went to see all that was high in painting and sculpture'.9 Northcote was intrigued by her: 'she plays very finely on the harpsichord, and sings and composes music', he wrote;10 she was 'withal, active, ambitious, proud, and restless', and had been 'the object of adoration of an indulgent father'; in appearance she was 'not unhandsome', with 'a form extremely delicate and a pleasing manner of the utmost simplicity'; she had 'some small knowledge of painting, the same of music, and about the same of five or six languages, but was very imperfect in all these'.11 She continued to attract a number of young men; the painter Prince Hoare was decidedly fond of her12 and by January 1779, after taking her and Mrs Banks to a concert in the Teatro di Valle, Joseph Mercer had finally decided he was 'certainly in love with her'.13 In April 1779 Maria visited Naples for a month with Thomas and Mrs Banks, Alexander Day, Henry Tresham, Prince Hoare and Northcote. Her stay in Rome ended when her mother took her to London with her family, less William who continued his studies in Rome. Thomas Jones said that 'Banks the Sculptor & his family with Miss Hatfield set off for England' from Rome on 18 May 177914 and the Hadfield passports were dated 9 June in Florence.15 As Mrs Cosway she returned to Italy with Catherine, Lady Wright, and her brother George in 1790, after the (difficult) birth of her only child in London. 'Surely', commented Horace Walpole, 'it is odd to drop a child and her husband all in a breath',16 but her marriage was proving difficult. She was in Venice copying old masters, and was staying with Mary Berry in Florence during the summer of 1791.16 This was presumably just after she had visited Rome with Lady Cowper, since Hewetson was writing in March how the recent presence in Rome of Madame Vigée Lebrun, Angelica Kauffman and Maria Cosway had led him to question whether it was possible to match the abilities of these three women 'amongst any three of the other sex ... in Painting & Musick'.17 In March 1793 Maria was unsuccessfully seeking admission to a convent in Genoa.18 She had returned to her husband in London by November 1794.  Maria visited Italy in 1804 with William Hadfield and finally returned in 1811 when her marriage was effectively over (Richard Cosway having become obsessively mystical and mesmerist). She settled in Lodi, where she founded a convent school for girls, which in 1830 was placed under the religious order of the Dame delle Inglesi. A painting by Gabriele Rottini, Maria Cosway surrounded by sisters and pupils listening to an oration is in the Fondazione, Lodi.

Another artist member of the accomplished Hadfield family, he was first recorded copying in the Uffizi in 1776-7,1 and he was studying under Hugh Primrose Dean in Florence in November 1776.2 He went to Rome with his mother and sister Maria in 'about' July 1777, to study painting,3 and he was returning from Florence to Rome with his sister on 13 December 1778.4 William did not go to London with the rest of the family in 1779. He was writing (in Italian) to Prince Hoare from Rome on 11 July 1779,5 and his departure for England was finally announced in May 1781.6 His portrait was drawn by Carlo Labruzzi in 1777, showing him holding a stylus (Uffizi). In 1804 he returned with his sister Maria to Italy and he was later in Russia. An undated letter to Ozias Humphry, thanking him for help afforded in Rome (i.e. in 1774-5) is annotated by Humphry 'Brother of Maria Cosway. He died on the banks of the Euxine [the Black Sea]'.7

Haggerston was reported in Naples in May 17181 and was in Padua on 23 March 1719,2 on both occasions with John Jackson.
The brothers Carnaby and Thomas Haggerston, accompanied by a Mr Jameson ('who taught in College at Bruges'), were in Rome for the winter of 1777-8 when they heard of their father's death. They planned, however, to remain abroad several months longer.1 Sir Carnaby, as he had become, was still in Rome in April 1778,2 and he was in Venice in May;3 while in Rome he commissioned designs from Quarenghi (now RIBA) for a new house at Haggerston. He was conceivably the 'Hazgster cavaliere inglese' in Florence on 24 August 1776.4

Guarnieri; AVR SA, S.Andrea delle Fratte)
Presumably also the Haigh/Hague travelling with Simson/Simpson, met by Sir James Hall in Florence on 9 November 1784 and again in Naples on 27 February 1785 (Hall jnl.MSS, 6326, f.175; 6327, f.5).

The Haldimands, father and son, are mentioned in the letters of Joshua Pickersgill. The father returned to Turin from Switzerland in April 1761 and the son was then about to return home to England. That autumn Haldimand took Pickersgill to see a village near Turin where they dined with a Mr Davico. In October 1768 Listor Haldimand married in England (Pickersgill letters MSS).
Sir Edward was in Italy with his son. In December 1777 they delivered a letter from Poyntz in Turin to Collet in Genoa.1 At Florence on 25 February 1778 Horace Mann wrote them an introduction to William Hamilton in Naples,2 and they were noticed in Rome by March 1778.3
James Hales of Kent arrived in Padua with John Macky of Dover on 3 January 1704.1 In Rome on 23 April the Duke of Shrewsbury visited Mr Hales, and on 9 August he again saw Mr Hales who was about to leave for Leghorn, Genoa and Constantinople; Hales told him 'an odd story how Mr Macky had been poisoned'.2
Stosch reported 'Mr Chales' in Rome with his governor 'Ramsey' in December 1725.1 'Richard Hales inglese' arrived in Padua with 'Andrew Ramsay scotus' on 3 July 1726.2




Sir James spent a year in Germany and eastern Europe before coming to Italy. He kept a travel journal (Hall jnl.MSS) which provides his itinerary and detailed notes on techniques of mining, archaeological sites and vulcanology, without altogether ignoring the fine arts.1 He left Vienna on 30 April 1784, and arrived in Venice on 15 May. The next day he was joined by Sir James Graham and Thomas Brand ('an old friend'). Together they went to Padua on 27 May and made a tour of northern Italy before settling for the summer in Switzerland (Hall reached Geneva on 13 June). On 3 October he came by sea from Nice to Genoa, whose 'grandeur & beauty' impressed him, and he then spent ten days in Turin, where the envoy John Trevor proved a kind host and introduced him to William Hamilton (14 Oct.), then on his way back to Naples from England. Hall saw Hamilton again at Bologna, where he also met 'Canonico' ('a pleasant little fellow').2 In Florence he spent much time in the Uffizi, remarking how Reynolds's self-portrait was both 'unlike & faded to pieces' (10 Nov.); he met Robert Merry and observed the Young Pretender 'a handsome old man, very infirm & led between two servants' (11 Nov.). He called on the painter H.D. Hamilton and saw in his studio 'several portraits very like', including one of Robert Merry and another of James Graham (14 Nov.).  He reached Rome on 18 November (but his account of his stay is missing from the journals). He witnessed an assembly of the Arcadians, the somewhat eccentric literary society, but decided he preferred 'the material lands of Dunglass without grasping at the Arcadian plains'.2 He sat to Angelica Kauffman in January/February 1785 (SNPG), and followed one of James Byres's strenuous antiquarian courses: for six weeks he was 'busy every morning for long hours going round with Byres & every night writing my journal', although during the next six weeks the 'amazement wore off'2 (Sir William Forbes saw Hall's journal in 1793, mentioning the description of Byres's discovery of the Circus of Caracalla).3 Hall left Rome on 25 February on hearing a [false] report that Vesuvius was erupting. Lord Grey de Wilton met him on the summit of Vesuvius on 6 March4 and his own journal described an ascent on 13 March. He was still in Naples on 4 April, experiencing 'nothing but the commonplace round'. He had met the Abbés Galieni and Raynal, and for the last six months, he told Robert Wharton, whenever he was 'sleepy or out of humour', he had been reading Boccaccio, who 'never fails of setting all to rights'.5 On 9 April he set out for Sicily with a Dr Home, 'two young gentlemen of great worth, remarkably well informed and indefatigable in their researches', commented Byres.6 They travelled down the coast by boat, visiting Paestum on 11 April. In Sicily their interests continued to be largely geological, and Byres subsequently recounted that they had been regarded with suspicion and were 'twice taken up for thieves - once on Etna & once on Vesuvius - as [they] went about the country like vagabonds carrying great hammers, breaking stones & hunting for treasures'.7 Hall's investigations were later the basis of a series of papers on mineralogy given to the Royal Society in Edinburgh. He was back in Rome by 2 August, and was then going on to Florence.7 He was in Paris in February 1786.8 His companion Dr Home may have been the 'Monsu Ome' living in the parish of S.Lorenzo in Lucina in Rome at Easter 1786.9
Hall was in Paris in August 1736, when arrangements were made for him to be paid through Jackson & Diharce at Leghorn; he was in Rome in April 1737.1 He was probably the 'Hal' staying with Lord Barrington at the Casa dei Gesuiti near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1737.2 In December 1736 Alexander Cunyngham had been asked by Hall's uncle to call on John Hall in Italy.3

Hall died at Leghorn on 12 April 1824, his gravestone recording that he had been 'for nearly 41 years' chaplain to the British Factory at Leghorn.1 William Gunn met him in Pisa in February 1785, and they remained in correspondence for the rest of their lives.2 Hall officiated at the funeral of Horace Mann in November 1786.3
Hall and the Rev. Younger, with Robert Hewer and How, all Jacobite sympathisers, left Rome for England in October 1730;1 Hall and Younger were in Venice by 1 December.2 This was, presumably, the Hall who had been in Rome with Sir John Astley from July to August.



Elizabeth Gibbes saw Hallyday at Bolzano on 12 and 13 October 1789 and in Florence on 5 June 1790 (Gibbes jnl.MSS).



Lord Archibald was probably in Geneva in September 1757,1 and was certainly in Rome in December 1758.2 By August 1759 he was with his tutor Cargil in Siena and in November 1760 he was, according to Horace Mann, living 'in the woods of Tuscany': 'he is quite a wild boy has nothing human in him but the pride of the Hamiltons, which is encouraged by a strange good-for-nothing creature he has with him, one Cargil, who they say, was a little schoolmaster and indeed he has all the air and presumption of one'.3 He was in Venice in April 1761 when Lady Mary Wortley Montagu found him 'a very pretty, wellbred youth'.4 In September 1792 Lord Archibald, with his relatives the Countess of Dunmore and her daughter Lady Augusta Murray, arrived by sea in Naples,5 but he was not mentioned in their subsequent tour.
According to Joseph Spence Charles Hamilton went twice to Italy, 'first at the Jubilee for '25 and afterwards in '32, when he dined with Lord Middlesex at Sir John Collins's. Has lived 22 months in Rome (palace in the Corso) and kept company much with the nobility of the country. Bought his noble Bacchus of one of them with a promise of secrecy'.1  He was possibly the Hamilton observed by Stosch in Rome in 1725-6: in December 1725 he had engaged in an energetic political argument with Edward Southwell and had broken a coach window, and in June 1726 he attended a dinner given by Dr Hay.2 Charles Hamilton was in Padua with Willem Bentinck on 25 March 1727,3 and they visited Vicenza and Verona together. Later in 1727 he was living in Rome on the Strada Paolina.4  The twenty-two months residence in Rome presumably refers to his second visit. An unsigned but securely identified journal (Baronscourt, co. Tyrone) contains his notes made in Rome from 5 February to 8 March and 7 April to 1 May 1732. His portrait by Antonio David was recorded at Melbury, a pendant to that of Henry Fox (see Henry, 1st Baron Holland) which was dated 1732.5 Accounts kept by Arthur Pond show that Hamilton had been importing marble busts and other works of art in the 1730s, presumably including some from Italy.6
Of a delicate constitution, the young 8th Duke of Hamilton resided on the Continent for four years with Dr John Moore as his 'tutor, preceptor, friend & physician'. Dr Moore's young son John (who was to become the hero of Corunna) also accompanied them, his father explaining that 'having now got a commission in the army, [Jack] considers himself no longer as a boy'. The Doctor had originally been summoned by the Duchess of Hamilton to attend her older son, the consumptive 7th Duke who had died in 1769.1  They visited Paris and spent two years in Geneva (where they were painted together in 1774 by Preud'home; Royal Museum of Scotland), before going on to Germany. In September 1775 Hamilton, who had shown himself susceptible to feminine charm, assured his mother from Vienna that it was not for 'Men or Women I wish to go to [Italy], but for the sake of the country itself', adding that he had 'not read the Roman classics with so very little feeling as not to wish to view the Country which they describe, and where they were written'.2  They arrived in Venice on 31 October 17753 and were in Rome by 2 December, when Patrick Home wrote that he had seldom seen a tutor 'whose manner with his Pupil pleases me so much'.4 Hamilton began to sit to Batoni for a whole-length portrait which is dated 1775 (Clark/Bowron 388; priv. coll.), although the head alone was complete in May 1776. By 6 January he had bought a large statue of Venus from Gavin Hamilton5 (who had previously painted Hamilton's mother). The Duke also commissioned from Gavin Hamilton the large history picture, Hector's farewell to Andromache (Holyrood) and sat for his portrait with Dr Moore and his son (priv. coll.)-an elaborate picture, including a view stretching from the Forum to the Alban Hills, which was not finished until the summer of 1777.6 Hamilton was prepared to spend further on virtù, but Moore restrained him: 'with infinite difficulty I got him turned from giving two hundred and fifty pounds for a little cameo of Caligula', and there was a necklace of antiques intended as a present for his mother which was 'ugly in itself', which he gave up 'after much persuasion'.7 They were attended in Rome by James Byres, and encountered the Countess of Albany and the Young Pretender who, doubtless recalling the Hamilton's previous Jacobite sympathies, 'kept his eyes fixed upon the Duke in a most remarkable manner'.7  On 5 March 1776 they arrived in Naples8 where Hamilton became involved with a lady, apparently Lady A-n, about whom he corresponded with Sir William Hamilton.9 Sir H F [Harry Fetherstonhaugh] became 'the Duke's inseparable companion', although Moore did not entirely approve.7 When they left on 7 May they were 'proposing to be home in a few months'.10 They spent a week in Rome, which would have been less, explained Moore, but for 'his Grace's sitting to Pompeio'; the 'Face only' was finished of the 'large full length' when they left. Leaving Fetherstonhaugh in Rome, they reached Florence in two days, arriving in some style with 'four footmen in crimson laced with silver'; 'the number of Horses Requisite is Inconvenient in Italy', wrote Moore, but 'there is no help for this; with the Duke's disposition and at his age conveniency is generally sacrificed to show'.7 On 1 June Moore reported that Hamilton was 'not blind to the charms of the Countess of Albany', but they had left Florence within two weeks. At Bologna they met Sir William and Lady Hamilton and stayed briefly in Milan and Turin before arriving in Geneva by 30 June. On 11 July 1776 Moore wrote from Geneva that Hamilton was undecided as to whether to spend a further winter abroad. In 1781 Dr Moore published his View of Society and Manners in Italy, which further described their tour.


By March 1733 Ezekiel Hamilton had 'lately' presented a paper to the Pretender against Lord Dunbar (James Murray). He was probably also the Hamilton at whose lodgings at Rome Lord Dunbar and Sparrow drank to the Pretender.1 A Mr Hamilton, possibly the same, was reported in Florence on 31 October 1733 on his way to Rome.2
A man of good sense and genteel education'1 and an outstanding figure in the artistic life of Rome in the later eighteenth century, Hamilton was active as a history painter, archaeologist and dealer. After study at Glasgow University, he first went to Rome to study painting under Agostino Masucci.2 In April 1748 he went with James Stuart, Nicholas Revett and Matthew Brettingham on foot to Naples for six weeks,3 and it may have been Hamilton who first suggested the expedition to Greece which resulted in Stuart and Revett's celebrated Antiquities of Athens [1762-], but for some reason Hamilton 'abandoned his part of the design'.4 The three were lodging in Rome on the Strada Felice 77, in 1748, 1749 and 1750.5  Hamilton had returned to London by July 1751, when he was described as a modest 'Lad of great honour' who 'very often requires a Spur to industry [and] loves to indulge himself in thinking of fine pictures and fine Compositions'; the few pictures he had brought from Italy showed 'such finishing as none here are capable of'.6 In 1756 Hamilton returned to Italy, that being, he wrote to Lord Tweeddale, 'what I am obliged to doe in consequence of my being a historical painter'.7 He was in Rome in 1756 with a pupil, John Day,8 and was based there for the rest of his life. Hamilton and Day lived in the parish of S.Andrea delle Fratte (Day leaving by 1766); in 1768 Hamilton was in the parish of S.Nicolo in Arcione and from (at least) 1774 to his death, he lived near the Piazza di Spagna in the parish of S.Lorenzo di Lucina.9  In 1757 Robert Adam met him in Rome living in a villa belonging to Cardinal Lante, 'a most delightful spot situate on the ancient Janiculum', and there they talked together of 'arts and sciences, of Greece and the Grecian Islands'.10 Hamilton was soon to succeed as a painter of Grecian, Homeric, subjects.11 In 1756 Nathaniel Curzon commissioned a Paris and Helen (Kedleston); in 1757 Henry Dawkins commissioned the huge Dawkins and Wood discovering Palmyra (loan to Glasgow U.), and Charles Compton (later 7th Earl of Northampton) the Andromache weeping over the body of Hector as a companion to Hector's Farewell by Batoni. Hamilton painted in all six Homeric subjects (each for a different patron, and measuring on average some 3 by 4 metres). Three were exhibited in London: Lord Northampton's Andromache at the SA in 1762, Achilles lamenting the death of Patroclus (painted for James Grant of Castle Grant, now SNG) at the SA in 1765, and The Heralds leading Briseis from the tent of Achilles by order of Agamemnon (painted for the 2nd Viscount Palmerston; Broadlands) at the RA in 1770. The other three subjects were Achilles dragging the Body of Hector round the Walls of Troy commissioned by Lord Tavistock in 1762 and finished in 1765; Priam pleading with Achilles for the body of Hector commissioned by Luke Gardiner in 1771 (untraced), and Hector's Farewell to Andromache (Hunterian, Glasgow), acquired by the 8th Duke of Hamilton c.1776. This last was the only one of the series not to be engraved (at Hamilton's expence) by Cunego between 1764 and 1778. The Andromache had attracted Winckelmann's attention; though the colouring was harsh, he wrote, 'the heads are very close to the Grecian form, and in the treatment is that calm which the Ancients sought'.12 Hamilton later defined his aim to express 'le sublime idee del incomparabile Homero',13 and once explained that to portray 'dignity without extravagance' (in the violent character of Achilles) was 'no easy task'.14 He was critical of his own work and Daniel Crespin observed how he had made 'a variety of attempts to improve that Part of the Painting he is less excellent in, I mean Colouring. He has that Candour & ingenuity that he himself points out whatever he esteems foible beyond even what others can see in him'.15 'What faults I may have made in so difficult an undertaking', Hamilton told James Grant, 'I assure you proceed more from defect of genius than want of pains'.16 In 1767 John Aikman wrote that 'all the young students apply to [Hamilton] for Direction and Instruction in their studies', and he was 'now the most renowned of all the History Painters of this age, ... highly respected in Rome'.17 He was elected to the Accademia di S.Luca in Rome on 11 January 1761, the same day as Thomas Jenkins,18 and to the Accademia Clementina, Bologna, on 29 May 1766.19  Between 1782 and 1784 Hamilton painted a set of eight subjects on the theme of Paris and Helen for the Stanza d'Elena in the Villa Borghese (three now in the Museo di Roma)-a commission from the Prince Borghese.20 But Homer did not monopolise his subject matter. There were Roman subjects such as Brutus promising to avenge Lucretia's death (commissioned by Charles, Lord Hope, in 1763; an undated version in the Theatre Royal, London), and Agrippina weeping over the ashes of Germanicus (for Lord Ossory, exhibited RA 1770, now untraced) and Agrippina landing at Brindisium with the Ashes of Germanicus (for Lord Spencer, exhibited RA 1772, now Tate Gallery), while Dr Robertson's History of Scotland provided the Mary Queen of Scots resigning her Crown (1765-75; Glasgow U.), painted for James Boswell and shown at the RA in 1776. Two subjects from Milton were painted for William Weddell (lost; engraved in 1768). Hamilton appreciated the importance of engravings, and when discussing his prices with Boswell, had said 'I don't intend to make you pay much money for this picture. I shall make a great deal by the print'.21 Portraiture was not neglected; he had painted James Grant in 1760 (untraced), and is said to have drawn Emma Hamilton (with whom he had travelled from London to Geneva early in 1786),22 but his three-quarter length of the 8th Duke of Hamilton with his two companions on the grand tour (1777; priv. coll.) remains the best known.23 By this time he was painting less, young Thomas Pelham commenting in August 1777 that 'he has been very indolent for some years, but seems to be willing to return to paint with more ardour than he had before'.24  It was less indolence than diversification, as Hamilton's activities as dealer and archaeologist grew in importance. It appears that Lord Spencer's Agrippina was commissioned as a 'douceur to secure Hamilton's services as an expert agent',25 for, as Patoun commented c.1766, 'Mr Hamilton the History painter has more true taste than any body at Rome'.26 Already in 1758 he was buying a Domenichino for Thomas Coke (1st Earl of Leicester), and Horace Mann reported him buying a Cignani.27 In 1764 James Martin saw a fine collection of drawings by Guercino in Hamilton's studio.28 In 1766 Hamilton told Lord Palmerston he had resolved to sell 'all my collection, never to think more of picture dealing, as it is attended with too much loss of time and don't by any means turn to account',29 but three years later he was telling Lord Ossory that he has in mind to make 'Your Lordship a collection of one agreable picture of each good master'.30 In 1773 he published his Schola Italica Picturae, a series of forty engravings by Cunego and Volpato of an ideal collection of sixteenth and seventeenth-century Italian paintings, from Raphael and Leonardo to Caravaggio and Guido. Ludovico Carracci's Birth of the Baptist which appeared there was sold by Hamilton to Lord Ossory in 1770.31 His greatest acquisitions were Raphael's Ansidei Madonna in 1764 from the Servite church of San Fiorenzo in Perugia (where it was replaced with a copy by Monti), eventually bought by Lord Robert Spencer,32 and in 1784 Leonardo's Virgin of the Rocks from the Hospital of S.Caterina alla Ruota, Milan, in 1785; he took it straight to London where the picture was seen in December 1785, and on 1 February 1786 it was sold to Lord Lansdowne (formerly 2nd Earl of Shelburne).33 In 1779 he acquired nine Poussins, including Christ and the Woman of Samaria, from the Boccapaduli collection34 (six years later Byres was to acquire Poussin's celebrated series of the Sacraments from the same collection). Hamilton travelled widely in Italy to secure paintings and he employed copyists, such as his friend Michelangelo II Ricciolini, F.-J. Lonsing or Monti, who would occasionally replace a picture he might acquire from a public place.35  Successful as he was as a dealer in old master paintings, his achievements as a dealer in antiquities and as an archaeologist (the two become indistinguishable) were more spectacular. 'Never forget', he told Charles Townley, 'that the most valuable acquisition a man of refined taste can make, is a peice of fine Greek Sculptour'.36 Hamilton had been dealing in ancient marbles before he began his excavations, first exporting marbles to England in 1758 (by 1796 he had exported over thirty consignments).37 In 1762 the young Marquess of Tavistock had asked him for statues or busts 'of merit and curiosity', in the hope of some of the best things from the Barberini Palace (including Poussin's Death of Germanicus, which was not sold).38 In 1766 Hamilton told Lord Palmerston that, at the Barberini Palace, 'I am no longer the onely purchaser there, Mr Morison and Nolekins have both of them bought marbles, and Mr Jenkins has given in a list for the first time, but as I am the oldest purchaser, I shall naturally have the preference'.39 In 1769 he told Lord Ossory that 'having lately terminated a considerable negotiation in Antiques with the Cardinal Alexander Albani I have now in my possession several very fine things' acquired 'in exchange for three large Cariates [caryatids?] wch. he was wanting for his villa',40 but otherwise he complained of the 'great scarcity at present of good antiques which goe at immence prices, the statues I used to buy for Lord Egremont now sell for a thousand at least'.41  Perhaps for such reasons, Hamilton began his excavations in the city and environs of Rome in 1769. It was then necessary to buy a concession on a site (cava) and to hand over a third of the findings to the State; exceptional pieces were bought for the Museo Clementino (opened in 1772 and rebuilt as the Pio Clementino on the accession of Pius VI in 1775), discoveries being assessed by the commissioner of antiquities (from 1768 G.B. Visconti). Though Visconti called Hamilton 'solertissimo ed indefesso cercatore d'antichita',42 he occasionally, like most, outwitted the commissioner. In 1775 Hamilton reminded Lord Shelburne 'never was a time so apropos for sending of antiques as at present, having no Pope, nor are we likely to have one soon',43 and on another occasion he exported the Townley Venus in two parts, that its quality might not be wholly appreciated; 'it happens that I must smugle this out as I have done most of all the fine things I have sent you', he told Townley.44 Hamilton was helped in his excavations by Piranesi and Jenkins (he told Ossory for example in 1769 'I have found some very fine things which I have disposed of immediately to Jenkins & other dealers at low prices'45), while the sculptors Cavaceppi, Pacetti and Pierantoni were among the restorers he used.46 Hamilton worked a number of sites, of which the more important were Pantanello, the lake site by Hadrian's Villa (1769-71), Tor Colombaro on the Via Appia (1771), Ostia (1772-6), Roma Vecchia (1774), and Monte Cagnolo 1774; later, in 1792, he was working at Palestrina and at Gabii for the Borghese family. Hamilton subsequently gave Townley an account of his excavations ('Ancient Marbles found in various places near Rome between 1769 and the Month of Novr. 1779'),47 in which he described how, in the Pantanello, his men were 'obliged to work past the knees in stinking mud, full of toads and Serpents and all kinds of vermin' but had found marbles, 'vases, basso-relievos, ornaments of all sorts' thrown 'promiscuously into this bottom, which by degrees had formed a small lake'. Hamilton's account ended with a list of his findings and of their possessors, of whom the most important were Thomas Jenkins (his associate), Lord Shelburne and Charles Townley. In 1772 Hamilton told Lord Shelburne that he aimed to 'make Shelburne House famous not only in England but all over Europe'; he proposed to complete a Sculpture Gallery (designed by Panini) within four years for an estimated £6,100.48 His original scheme was modified with time and the cost increased, but by 1779 the collection was indeed famous; it included the Wounded Amazon found at the Hadrian's Villa in 1771 (Metropolitan Museum, New York), the Cincinnatus found at the Villa Adriana in 1769 (now Copenhagen), the Belvidere Antinous from Tor Colombaro in 1771 (now Ludington coll., Santa Barbara), the restored Diskobolos whose torso was found at Ostia in 1772 (now Bowood) and the Athena (now Los Angeles MA) found in 1774. Charles Townley began buying direct from Hamilton (as opposed to buying his things through Jenkins) in 1773; the Townley Vase and the Actaeon came from Monte Cagnolo in 1774, and the Townley Venus, which dominates Zoffany's famous picture of Townley in his Library (Towneley Hall AG, Burnley), from Ostia in 1776. Of pieces not acquired by Shelburne or Townley, perhaps the most important was the 'Warwick' Vase found at Hadrian's Villa in 1771 and acquired by Sir William Hamilton. The most expensive was the colossal Antinous found at Ostia in 1775 and sold to James Smith Barry that year for £1000 (the highest recorded price for any antiquity sent from Rome to England in the eighteenth century).49  In his later years Hamilton returned at least twice to Britain. In December 1785 he took his Leonardo Virgin of the Rocks to London; he returned to Italy soon after the sale of the picture in February 1786.50 He was again in London with more pictures for sale in May 1789 and in Scotland that September; he had returned to Rome, whether from the same trip is uncertain, in May 1791.51  Hamilton cut a considerable figure in his later years. Distinguished travellers remarked on 'the goodness and benevolence of his heart'.52 He was counselling the young Canova when he first came to Rome53 and his marble bust by Hewetson (shown at the RA in 1786) belonged to Sir William Hamilton (now Glasgow U.); Hewetson was painted standing by this bust by Tofanelli (Wallraf-Richartz-Museum, Cologne). In 1792, nearly seventy years old, he was still active; in June he wrote to Townley 'I am just got up after an ague of 3 weeks and somewhat weak; nevertheless I can not help putting pen to paper and to give you some account of my proceedings at the Cava of Gabio'.54 Artaud saw him at the end in 1797, 'exceedingly broken', age having made 'great depradations on his mental powers'.55 Hamilton died in Rome on 4 January 1798.
Already a successful portrait pastellist, Hamilton went to Italy with his wife and young daughter when he was about forty years old.1 His acquaintance 'with most of the English nobility' made him an influential figure among British artists in Italy,2 and his sitters included the most distinguished, such as Lady Cowper, the 2nd Earl Spencer, and the 4th Earl of Bristol. He painted at least four portraits of the Duchess of Albany (1785-8), and at least two of her father, the Young Pretender (c.1785-8); further Jacobite portraits of Cardinal York and the Princesses Stolberg-Gedern and Sobieska were listed in Duff House in 1798,3 and in Rome Sir William Forbes saw portraits by Hamilton of the Young Pretender and his brother Cardinal York in the Abbé Water's house in 1792.4 When William Blackett sent home his portrait done in Florence by Hamilton he explained that 'he takes the strongest likenesses ever I saw'.5  Hamilton was first recorded in Rome on 15 May 1782 when James Irvine remarked that Hamilton, 'a good plain sort of man' whose chalk portraits were 'very Clever', had been there 'a few months with his wife and daughter a girl of about fourteen'.6 On 3 March 1783 John Ramsay saw in his studio portraits of Christopher Norton, Piranesi, the Abbé Grant and 'Mr Brown', and on 7 July he noticed another of 'Livinstoun' [Philip Livingston]; Stawell was also sitting to Hamilton in July 1783 (see note 11). The Hamilton family lived in the stalla dei Sigrei in 1782, and in the Casa Guarnieri from 1787 to 1791.7 Mrs Hamilton, whom Quin described in 1786 as 'mad', was listed as a Catholic (while her husband and daughter appear as Protestants); she does not appear in 1790 or 1791, and her death at the age of 53 is recorded in the liber mortuorum of S.Giovanni in Laterano on 6 October 1789. In May 1791 Hewetson said that 'H. Hamilton & his Daughter are just on the point of leaving us to go home'.8 Though principally in Rome, Hamilton spent some two years in Florence, where he had arrived in October 1783. On 1 January 1784 Hamilton was admitted to study statuary in the Medici collection9 and his copy of the Venus de Medici was later described as coloured 'like flesh and blood'.10 John Ramsay was sitting to him in Florence in April and May 1784.11 He was in Venice on 28 May 1784, when Jonas Brooke sat to 'Mr Hamilton' (and he was probably the 'Mr Hamilton' seen in Venice on 19 May).12 On 25 October 1784 Hamilton was elected to the Accademia del Disegno in Florence.13 The following month Sir James Hall, who had met him in Naples, saw in in his studio in Florence portraits of Robert Merry and 'J. G.' [Sir James Graham], which he judged 'as like as possible'.11 In January 1786 Henry Quin in Rome met 'Hamilton the Painter who is just returned from Florence with a mad wife - He still continues portrait painting and succeeds in it to his utmost wishes'.14  In the course of his Italian sojourn Hamilton also painted some large subject pictures, such as the Diana and Endymion (1783; priv. coll.), in which the figures derive closely from Roman and Hellenistic sculptures seen in Rome. He shared this interest in antiquity with his friends Canova and Flaxman, the leading neo-classical sculptors of Rome. Among his more ambitious pastels is the Canova in his studio with Henry Tresham (1788-9; priv. coll.), and a more modest half-length pastel of Canova was sold in 1995 (Christie's, 7 Nov.); after Hamilton's return to Ireland the two corresponded, somewhat nostalgically.15 Flaxman came to Rome in December 1787 and by the following July he described Hamilton and his daughter as 'the chief friends we have here'.2 The Hamiltons and Flaxmans went together to Naples and Pompeii early in 1788, and bathed at Acqua Santa (near Rome), Hamilton 'because he got a cold, & his daughter for pleasure'.16 Mrs Flaxman was quite taken with Hamilton's daughter Harriott (b. c.1769) whom she described as 'a very agreeable girl, about nineteen, and very accomplished. She plays on the harpsichord and harp and sings very prettily. She is a very good Latin scholar and is learning Greek'.16 Flaxman carved a bust of Harriott (now lost), whose face he thought 'a fine study for a sculptor'.2  Hamilton appears to have been a benign character, taking no part in the factions which sometimes disturbed British artists in Rome; he and Jacob More 'belong to no party yet have their share of business', wrote Hewetson.8 James Byres, the celebrated antiquarian (who led a faction), owned a number of Hamilton's portraits, including the portrait of himself (Aberdeen) and his nephew Christopher Norton (Christie's, 22 Nov. 1977), suggesting that Hamilton benefitted from his attentions. Hamilton also assembled a collection of pictures and prints in Italy which was dispersed at Christie's in 1811 (15 May).
James Hamilton Hibernus' was in Padua on 20 December 1716.1 An undated portrait of James Hamilton painted at Rome by Trevisani remains in the collection of his descendants.2
The 5th Duke of Hamilton was said to have been abroad on a grand tour in September 1719, but he was not then recorded in Italy.1 In 1729 he made a brief tour of Italy. He was in Venice for the Carnival at the beginning of the year, indulging his love of opera (he had been a Director of the Royal Academy of Music in London in 1727-8). The librettos of three operas which he must have attended in Venice remain in the Hamilton archives: Porpora's Semiramide, and the anonymous Vespetta e Pimpinone and Teba.1 A pastel portrait by Rosalba Carriera, identified as the 5th Duke of Hamilton, further confirms his visit to Venice.2 Hamilton appears next to have gone to Parma. A fourth libretto in the Hamilton archives, for Giacomelli's Lucio Papirio, suggests Hamilton attended its performance in the 'spring' of 1729 at Parma, and a production of Adelaide performed in Parma during the Carnival early in 1729 was dedicated to the Duke.1 He arrived in Rome with a Mr Glanville and a Mr Maule (possibly Captain Maule) on 1 April. Stosch reported that the Duke visited the Pretender after dark disguised as an Abbé. By 21 April they had left for a brief visit to Naples, to return to Rome six days later. Hamilton had intended to leave immediately for Florence and Parma, but he stayed on, apparently to meet Lord Jersey (who had also been in Naples). Hamilton finally left on 9 May for Florence, where the Grand Duke (who had known his father) had extended a personal invitation. After his departure Stosch, already aggrieved by Hamilton's political behaviour, reported that he had tried to leave Rome without settling his debts, conduct which had 'beaucoup scandalisé La Noblesse Romaine et Angloise'.3
The 6th Duke of Hamilton is said to have made a foreign tour in 1742.1 In Scotland in 1744-5 he was, like his father, a Jacobite sympathiser,2 but when he was in Florence in June/July 1750 it was remarked that such sympathies seemed 'to have almost work'd through his Constitution'.3 Mme de St Gilles in Turin later recalled that Hamilton had been a great gallant of hers.4 A portrait of him by Dupra remains at Lennoxlove, with the dubious inscription 'Dupont pinxit Tawini [Turin] 1752'.

A portrait attributed to Benefial (c.1745) is inscribed Io Hamilton (priv. coll. USA; photo RBF).
The J. Hamilton in Padua on 30 December 1717,1 was probably also the 'Hamilton' who in April 1718 delivered a letter to George Berkeley in Rome; this Hamilton, who has been tentatively identified as John Hamilton, then intended making a short stay in Naples.2


Described in 1753 as 'the oldest and most Eminent Merchant [at Naples]',1 and in 1757 as 'a considerable English merchant'.2
[visits to England 1771-2, 1776-7, 1783-4 and 1791]Hamilton lived for thirty-six years at the British embassy at Naples, where his activity as a connoisseur and scholar, and latterly his second marriage with Emma Hart, attracted European notice. Emma's liaison with Nelson, the temporary saviour of Naples in 1798, is here described as an inseparable part of Hamilton's residency. Hamilton became the confidant of the Bourbon King and maintained a peculiar dignity through the unusual events of his final years abroad. Tall and meagre, he possessed 'such an air of intelligence, blended with distinction, in his countenance, as powerfully attracted and conciliated all who approached him'.1  Having asked for the embassy at Naples 'on account of Mrs Hamilton's ill-health and my own situation', he was appointed in August 1764 and arrived with his wife on 17 November.2 He had residences to the north and south of Naples, a small villa at Posillipo (later called the Villa Emma),3 and another at Portici (the Villa Angelica, close to Vesuvius), but his principal seat was the Palazzo Sessa. Within five months of their arrival an English visitor observed that Hamilton was 'a very agreeable Man, His Collection of Etruscan Vauses are very Fine, & His Specimens of the different Lavas[;] Mrs Hamilton plays better on the Harpsicord than any Woman I think I ever heard',4 one of the earliest (and least grammatical) acknowledgments of the Hamiltons' civilised hospitality, and an indication of how quickly Hamilton exercised his academic interests. Geology and volcanology were his foremost studies. Within four years he had twenty-two times ascended Mount Vesuvius. He described the mountain's volcanic character and sent geological specimens to the Royal Society in London, of which he was elected Fellow in 1766 and with whose President, Joseph Banks, he long maintained a correspondence. There were eruptions of Vesuvius in March 1766 and October 1767 which Hamilton fearlessly observed at first hand. In 1769, between April and July, Hamilton visited Sicily with his wife and Lord Fortrose, climbing and closely examining the volcanic Mount Etna; they also passed the Lipari islands with Mount Stromboli 'continually emitting fire'. He was, however, unimpressed with the Sicilians who 'seem to me as indolent and inactive as at Naples, but the Nobility are better educated and much more conversable'.5  His first impressions of Italy had been mixed: 'the more I see of this country the more I like it & the more I see of the people the less I like them', he told Horace Mann,6 but he was to be greatly moved by Rome which he first visited between 3 February and mid-April 1768.7 'Rome greatly surpasses my expectations', he told Lord Shelburne, 'it is here alone that a true idea can be formed of the magnificence of the Ancients, of their perfection in the Arts, and of the excellent Raphaels Pencil'.8 Hamilton and his wife Catherine were painted whole-length by Maron (now lost);9 twice a week they were escorted round the antiquities by Winckelmann,10 and the assiduous notes Hamilton then made survive in a copy made by Edmond Pery.11 Mann told Hamilton that Lord Stormont 'says you was indefatigable in your pursuit of virtu'.12  Hamilton was, indeed, an astonishing collector. Soon after his arrival in Naples he became friendly with Bernardo Tanucci, a senior minister and the director of antiquities, to whom he expressed concern over the dilatory excavations at Herculaneum and Pompeii. In April 1770 Hamilton was allowed to export a number of antique heads and statues, and that same year Dr Burney commented that 'the curiosities both of art and nature in Mr Hamilton's possession are numberless and inestimable'.13 In 1766 he had bought the Porcinari collection of Greek ('Etruscan') vases, and by 1771 his collection contained 175 terracottas, over 600 bronzes and 6,000 coins, ivories, glass and gems, and 730 vases. These he published lavishly as Greek and Roman Antiquities with texts by P.-F. Hugues (the baron d'Hancarville) and hand-coloured engraved plates; their influence on neo-classical design and taste was to be profound, most immediately on the production of Wedgwood's Etruscan ware (in which Hamilton took much interest). D'Hancarville proved difficult: after the printing of the first two volumes in 1767 and 1770, he took Hamilton's money for the third and fourth volumes, pawned the copper plates, and with the proceeds took out fishing rights in Tuscany; Hamilton caught up with him in a Florentine prison.14 The third and fourth volumes were eventually printed in 1796. Music also played an important part in his life. Hamilton had been one of Giardini's first pupils in London and there were frequent chamber concerts in the Palazzo Sessa. David Allan painted the Hamiltons together in 1770, with Catherine seated at the harpsichord (priv. coll.). The Abbé Grant described how she would play 'every piece of music at sight and will continue hours and hours playing out of her own head, which she composes as fast as she plays and they are the most enchanting and delightfull harmony I ever heard'.15 In May 1770 she played before the young Mozart. Anne Miller referred to Mrs Hamilton's weekly Musical Assemblies, 'called an Accademia di Musica'.16 Horace Walpole remarked that in addition to being 'an incomparable performer on the harpsichord' Catherine 'cut figures in card excellently'.17  Hamilton had been promoted from envoy extraordinary to minister plenipotentiary in 1767, the year of the King Ferdinand IV's coming of age. This new king of Naples, though popular, was ill educated and his behaviour had embarrassed those who attended his marriage in 1768 to the Habsburg Princess Maria Carolina (the sister of Marie-Antoinette). Hamilton spent long hours with him on barbarous and informal hunting expeditions (he once told Joseph Banks there were 'no less than 1336 Dogs' involved), but he earned Ferdinand's confidence. In March 1769 Hamilton received particular marks of favour from the Queen's brother, Joseph II of Austria, who came to Naples on an informal visit, and temporary hopes were aroused of Hamilton's transfer to Vienna. That same year Charles Greville, Hamilton's favourite young nephew, came to visit him and their relationship was to become increasingly involved.  In 1771 Hamilton was granted leave. He left Naples in June,18 and on 6 August was elected an honorary member of the Accademia Clementina in Bologna, probably after he had passed through on his journey to England.19 By August he was in London with his wife and they stayed a year, in which time he sold his great collection to the British Museum for £8,400, but was unable to find a buyer for a Correggio Venus (now attributed to Cambiaso; priv. coll.), for which he asked the considerable price of £3,000 and finally left with Greville. On 15 January 1772 he was made a Knight of the Bath. David Allan's whole-length portrait of him wearing the Order, painted in Italy in 1775, was presented to the British Museum in 1776.  The Hamiltons returned to Naples overland, staying in Vienna before passing through Venice (late November 1772), Florence (mid-December) and Rome. There Hamilton, accompanied by Thomas Jenkins, had an informal interview with Pope Clement XIV who told him he collected 'only to curb the prodigious export of valuable monuments of antiquity which has prevailed of late years'.20 Hamilton also observed the Young Pretender, and there ensued an episode with Isaac Jamineau, the fretful British consul at Naples, who foolishly accused Hamilton of having Jacobite sympathies.21 They finally reached Naples in January 1773 when Hamilton was warmly welcomed by the King who told him 'You have gained the hearts of the Neapolitans and you deserve them'. Hamilton also came to enjoy a close friendship with Queen Maria Carolina, and it was largely because of his privileged diplomatic position that Naples took no side in the American War of Independence (1775-84). Hamilton now embarked upon a second collection, while continuing to trade with works of art. He had bought the fragments of the colossal marble 'Warwick Vase' (now Burrell coll.; Glasgow) excavated by Gavin Hamilton at Hadrian's Villa in 1771 and had had the vase carefully restored. 'I was obliged to cut a block of marble at Carrera to repair it, which has been hollowed out & the fragments fixed on it', he told Greville; the restored vase was engraved by Piranesi for his Vasi, candelabri [1778].22 After the Trustees of the British Museum had failed to agree his price in December 1775,23 the vase was bought by his elder nephew, the 2nd Earl of Warwick. Hamilton bought several pictures for his nephew Charles Greville; in October 1774 a 'Parmegiano', Lodovico Carracci and a Cambiaso, and in January 1776 other pictures by Cagnacci, Annibale Carracci and Albani (as well as a 'Leonardo' for himself, now attributed to Luini in a priv. coll.). His taste in pictures was conventional, and focussed principally on Bolognese and Venetian artists.  From his superior point of view, Hamilton was frequently amused by the culture of British tourists in Naples: 'one or two of the set always decide the rest whether they shall follow the Arts, gaming, whoring, or drinking. Last year the Arts and gaming were the prevailing passions, ... this year it is drinking & gaming'; he went on to tell Greville how the King had played with them and that 'the English party lost above two thousand pounds, most of which was won by H.S.M., who is quite fond of the English'.24 Later he told George Cumberland that while there were many 'lovers of the Arts' in England, 'of true Conoisseurs I know but few', and he added that 'few of the members of Society [of Dilettanti] are men of true taste'.25 Hamilton, by comparison, belonged to the age of Enlightenment; his enquiries were broadly based and seriously directed. In 1773 Lord Winchilsea saw his 'Electrical Machine' by means of which he 'makes the fire run round ye cornice of the room to the great amazement of all the Neapolitans',26 and Hamilton was able to demonstrate the efficacy of Benjamin Franklin's conductors after Lord Tylney's house had been struck by lightning in March 1773.27 In 1776 Hamilton published the first volume of his Observations on the Volcanoes of the Two Sicilies (the Campi Phlegraei), illustrated by Pietro Fabris, a 'most ingenious and able artist' whose views were 'completed', wrote Hamilton in his preface, 'under my own eye, and by my direction, with the utmost fidelity'. A second volume followed in 1779, including a long description of the eruption of that year.  In May 1776 the Hamiltons again left Naples for England where they stayed over a year during which Hamilton was elected to the Society of Dilettanti. On their return journey they had passed through Florence by 4 November 1777.28  Back in Naples Hamilton told Greville that 'My utmost ambition now is to be left where I am. Upon the whole nothing at home, or even in a higher station abroad, would allow me to pass my time so much to my own satisfaction as I do at present'.29 In another letter he described their life: 'we dine at our casino at Pausilipo every day; where it is as cool as in England. Spring and autumn we inhabit our sweet house in Portici ... and in the winter I follow the King to Caserta and the Appenines after wild boars, &c, which amuses me in the day & the Queen's affability with music, of which the K. is now passionately fond, make the evening pass agreably'.30 Catherine's playing had particularly delighted the young William Beckford when he arrived in 1780, but her health now gave cause for concern. In the spring of 1782 Hamilton had begun to construct for her 'a high and well-ventilated apartment and bedroom' with a bow-window on the third floor of the Palazzo Sessa,31 but it could not prevent her death on 25 August. When she had first come to Italy in 1764 Mann had noticed her asthma and called her that 'poor, good, sickly creature', and now the Abbé Grant lamented the loss of 'the best friend I had among the lady's ... the most aimiable Lady Hamilton'.32  It was nine months before Hamilton could bring her body back to Wales for burial on her family's estate at Slebech, and in that time he received Thomas Jones, who painted for him a large view of the Campi Flegrei,33 and Allan Ramsay and his son-to whom he played 'several of Handel's different things on the violin' and talked of the worship of Priapus,34 a practice he had discovered the previous year in Isernia in the Abruzzi, to the annoyance of the Catholic church. Hamilton was also able to observe the effects of the great Calabrian earthquakes of February and March 1783 which killed some 40,000 people; he sailed down the coast between 2 and 23 May, and his account was later published in the Philosophical Transactions. On 24 May 1783 he left for England with his wife's body and the magnificent antique glass Vase from the Barberini collection (now known as the 'Portland Vase'; BM) which he had bought from Byres. This he sold to the Duchess of Portland, with other minor antiquities, for 1,800 gn. He stayed in England until September 1784, often seeing Greville, whose mistress, Emma Hart, he met and liked. He left for Naples in September 1784. Arriving in Turin on 14 October, he then stayed four days in Milan before reaching Bologna on 31 October.35 On his return to Naples there ensued a remarkable correspondence with his nephew who, compelled to seek a bride worth £30,000, was anxious to relieve himself of Emma. As Hamilton's heir, he was anxious that his uncle should not remarry, and he hinted at the possibility of having 'Love ready made'. Hamilton wrote that 'it would be fine fun for the young English Travellers to endeavour to cuckold the old Gentleman their Ambassador'.36 Emma herself, while admiring Hamilton, remained greatly attached to Greville and initially believed that any visit to Naples would be a temporary affair. She assured Hamilton that in Naples 'I shall always keep my own room when you are better engaged or go out, and at other times I hope to have the pleasure of your company and conversation'. He, meanwhile, assured Greville that he would 'hobble in and out of this pleasant scrape as decently as I can'.37 Emma arrived in Naples on 26 April 1786, her twenty-first birthday, with her mother, Mrs Cadogan. The painter Gavin Hamilton had travelled from England with them as far as Geneva. Sir William, commented Byres, 'has lately got a piece of modernity from England, which I am afraid will fatigue and exhaust him more than all the volcanoes and antiquities in the Kingdom of Naples'.38  Hamilton had already flirted with the widowed Lady Clarges whom he had met on his return journey in Turin and Rome; she had come to Naples but declared that she had resolved never to marry again. Now Hamilton tended the education of Emma, who was quick to tell Greville that a certain Prince 'Draydrixton' thought her 'a dymond of the first watter, and the finest creature on the hearth'.39 By December she had become Hamilton's mistress and was soon performing her famous Attitudes. She had learned to pose in London while sitting to George Romney who was deeply interested in the theatre. Now Goethe, who arrived in Naples in the spring of 1787 with Tischbein, described her performance: 'After many years of devotion to the arts and the study of nature, [Hamilton has] found the acme of these delights in the person of an English girl of 20 with a beautiful face and a perfect figure. He has had a Greek costume made for her which becomes her extremely. Dressed in this, she lets down her hair and, with a few shawls, gives so much variety to her poses, gestures, expressions, etc., that the spectator can hardly believe his eyes'.40 Attitudes apart, Goethe admitted that Emma seemed 'frankly, a dull creature'. Lady Webster recounted that once, reclining on a Greek vase, Emma said to Hamilton, 'Doun't be afeared Sir Willum, I'll not crack your joug'.41  Hamilton was undeterred by such comments. He was 'distractedly in love, and indeed I love him tenderly', Emma told Greville: 'The house is ful of painters painting me. He as now got nine pictures of me, and 2 a painting. Marchant is cuting my head in stone, that is in cameo for a ring. There is another man modeling me in wax, and another in clay. All the artists is come from Rome'; she herself had drawn Vesuvius, explaining that 'I am so used to draw now, it is as easy as A B C'; she was rapidly learning Italian and French, and had a music master who was developing her soprano voice, and she had 'had great offers to be first whoman in the Italian Opera at Madrid'.42  Goethe had also seen Hamilton's lumber room which then contained a huge collection of antiquities not generally shown to visitors. He recognised two bronze candelabra very like two at Portici from Pompeii; 'No doubt they somehow strayed here from the cellars of Pompeii. Perhaps these and other such lucky acquisitions are the reason why Sir William shows his hidden treasures only to his most intimate friends'.43 Tischbein, who stayed in Naples and helped Hamilton prepare a catalogue of his second collection of vases (this time illustrated in simple outline), once saw Hamilton in full Court dress carrying a basket full of Greek vases, the Minister holding one handle and a ragged lazzarone the other.44 Hamilton now believed the vases were Greek (rather than Etruscan) and, as he had explained to Greville in 1790, 'my new collection of vases will throw great light upon ancient history, fabulous history & mithology of the Greeks, but they are a treasure for artists. It is now beyond a doubt that they are Grecian & not Etruscan'.45 The first volume of the catalogue was published in 1793; a second volume appeared in 1796, a third in 1800 and a fourth after Hamilton's death. Flaxman was among the many artists who were to profit from them, and in 1792 he had acknowledged to Hamilton 'the many instances of your kindness & favor which I have already received' and 'that regard & attention which genius & talents always meet with from your liberality'.46 In 1788 Hamilton had sent to the Prince of Wales (later George IV) a huge bust of Augustus, very probably that which Hamilton had acquired in 1783 and had had discreetly restored by Byres.47  In April 1791 Hamilton, with Emma and Mrs Cadogan, set out for England. On their way through Rome 'Mrs Hart' performed her Attitudes for the benefit of the artists, all of whom attended, wrote Irvine, except Deare and Maria Hadfield; Hewetson, 'all rapture' when Emma was the theme, 'says he is to attempt something from her on her return';48 he was carving busts of both the Hamiltons in 1797.49  In London Hamilton was sworn a member of the Privy Council, and on 6 September 1791 in Marylebone he married Emma, allegedly because 'she only of her sex exhibited the beautiful lines he found on his Etruscan vases'; he has 'actually married his gallery of statues' commented Horace Walpole.50 Emma was not received at Court and was thereby deprived of any official position; 'she is totally independant of the Diplomatic line' Hamilton emphasised.51  They were in Rome in November, and by December 1791 they were back in Naples, where Queen Maria Carolina had little difficulty in receiving Emma in a private capacity, seeing in her perhaps, a means of influencing the British envoy.  The French wars now impinged on the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. In August 1792 a new French Ambassador, M. Mackau, was received in Naples; he was a republican sympathiser and removed the Bourbon lilies from his residence. French warships anchored outside Naples, their presence exciting republican demonstrations in Naples. France declared war on Britain on 1 February 1793 and Hamilton was then exercised to keep Naples either neutral or pro-British. On 12 July he was able to conclude a treaty with the chief Minister Acton (John Francis Edward Acton, 'a very sensible man'), by which Naples agreed to end trading with France and to receive British protection for her merchant fleet.  On 11 September 1793 the Agamemnon captained by Horatio Nelson arrived in the Bay of Naples, to escort Neapolitan ships and men (as pledged by the Anglo-Neapolitan treaty) to Toulon. Nelson stayed only four days, during which he was received at Court and by the Hamiltons. In December Napoleon recaptured Toulon for the French, and Royalist refugees and dispirited survivors returned to Naples. The Queen's sister, Marie Antoinette, was guillotined on 16 October, increasing Maria Carolina's implacable hatred of the French. The sombre mood was reinforced by an earthquake and a violent eruption of Vesuvius in June and July 1794. Hamilton reported to the Royal Society with authority that it was the worst eruption since 79 and 1631. Hamilton began to suffer from bilious attacks in 1795, when Emma found that 'My ever dear Queen as been like a mother to me, since Sir William has been ill'; it was a complex relationship, as she explained: 'against my will, owing to my situation here, I am got into politicks, and I wish to have news for our dear much-loved Queen, whom I adore' she told Greville.52 On 5 June 1796 Naples made peace with the French. There were still peaceful moments. In the English garden Hamilton had lovingly created (with John Graefer) in the grounds of the Royal Palace at Caserta, Emma alleged that 'both him and me are now studying botany'.53 British visitors came in great numbers while Naples remained unthreatened by the French. 'There are 73 strange English at Naples at present, and a hundred more expected from Rome', commented Lady Palmerston in January 1793; fifty were then dining with the Hamiltons, but she thought Hamilton already was looking 'extremely ill'.54 In November 1796 Sir Gilbert Elliot found Emma's figure 'nothing short of monstrous for its enormity, and is growing every day. She tries hard to think size advantageous to her beauty, but is not easy about it. Her face is beautiful; she is all Nature and yet all Art; that is to say her manners are perfectly unpolished, of course very easy, though not with the ease of good breeding, but of a barmaid'.55 'She is twice as fat as she was two years ago', wrote Lady Berwick in 1796; '& very coarse. I like her upon the whole better than I did, she is perfectly good humourd, has no friendship for any human being but has no great harm in her'.56 The Attitudes still impressed; Morritt told his mother how Emma 'with the assistance of one or two Etruscan vases and an urn' became 'a Sibyl, then a Fury, a Niobe, a Sophonisba drinking poison, a Bacchante drinking wine, dancing and playing the tambourine, an Agrippina at the tomb of Germanicus, and every attitude of almost every different passion', and that a painter had 'cried with pleasure the whole time'; later in the day Emma sang an operatic lament 'which made us shudder and cry', danced a tarantella with castanets, and then sang vaudevilles 'till she convinced us all that acting was a joke to her talents'.57 A set of twelve engravings from drawings by Rehberg was published in 1794 illustrating the Attitudes; they were dedicated to Hamilton, but Emma was not named; The Oracle, however, had reported from Rome on 6 July 1794 that 'Frederigo Richberg is gone to Naples, to take Lady Hamilton's Attitudes, which are afterwards to be printed'. As Hamilton's health declined and the prospects of French invasion lingered, he grew concerned over the fate of his collections. In 1796 he had vainly tried to sell his second collection of vases to the King of Prussia for £7,000, describing it as having 'more than a thousand vases, and one half of them figured'.58 In 1798 he took an inventory of his 347 pictures in the Palazzo Sessa,59 fourteen of which were portraits of Emma, three each by Tischbein and Romney, two each by Vigée Lebrun and Gavin Hamilton, and others by Reynolds, Angelica Kauffman and Guy Head; according to Vigée Lebrun, Hamilton was not above selling Emma's portraits to admirers.60 Other contemporary works were by Canaletto, Mengs, Chardin, Philipp Hackert, Flaxman (a terracotta self-portrait; now VAM) and Vernet, and Lord Gardenstone described a room 'adorned with paintings by Fabris, an Englishman, which represents in a very pleasing stile, the characters and humours of the people of Naples'. Amongst the essentially Venetian and Bolognese old masters, were pictures by Rembrandt, Jordaens and Wouwermans, as well as four pictures 'by Simonelli, scholar of Giordano' from a church in Naples 'where I left copies by Candido in their place'. There were also two large views of Naples by Lusieri which he had commissioned in 1790/1, painted from the first Lady Hamilton's room in the Palazzo Sessa.61 Hamilton had already sent his Greek vases to England by sea and the remainder of his collection was being packed in nineteen cases during October, November and December 1798 under the direction of the antiquary James Clark, whose inventory has also survived.62 Apart from ancient marble and bronze sculpture, it included Hewetson's marble bust of Gavin Hamilton, contemporary alabaster and bronze vases-two by Luigi Valadier-Wedgwood pottery and Derbyshire china. The collection was eventually sent to England in 1800. All Hamilton's furnishings remained in Naples.  Nelson meanwhile, having defeated the French at Aboukir Bay on 1 August 1798, returned to Naples on 22 September for the refitting of his fleet. 'History, either ancient or modern,' Hamilton wrote him, 'does not record an action that does more honor to the heroes that gained the victory'.63 On his arrival Nelson assured Lady Knight that the happiest day of his life was not that of his victory, but that on which he married Lady Nelson.64 There was a dinner for 800 guests on 29 September, Nelson's birthday, after which Nelson told Lord St Vincent (formerly John Jervis) he hoped to be away in a week: 'I am very unwell, and the miserable conduct of this Court is not likely to cool my irritable temper. It is a country of fiddlers and poets, whores and scoundrels'.65 He addressed the military situation, urging a Neapolitan advance on Rome, which would encourage the Austrians to advance from the north, thus trapping the French. Nelson sailed for Malta on 9 October to return in November. He then heard George III had created him a Baron, Lord Nelson of the Nile. Emma was increasingly at his side. Despite the Austrian withdrawal from the original plan, the Neapolitan army marched (under General Mack), while Nelson's fleet took more troops to Leghorn. On 29 November 1798 King Ferdinand entered Rome with his Neapolitan army; on 7 December he left, fleeing before General Championnet. On 23 December Nelson took the King and Queen and the Hamiltons to Palermo with other nobility; the crossing took three tempestuous days, during which a young Prince died and Emma distinguished herself by nursing and comforting the Royal family. At Palermo Hamilton was ill and several factors arose further to dispirit him; Emma's gambling and increasingly indiscreet behaviour with Nelson, Ferdinand's surrender to the French on 11 January 1799, and the news, eventually received in March, that the ship with his vases had sunk off the Scilly Isles. This last was perhaps the bitterest blow, although he later learned that some items had been recovered (the wreck of the Colossus was located in 1974 and some 35,000 fragments of pottery were recovered in 1980). The fortunes of Naples then revived, as Cardinal Ruffo recaptured the city with a volunteer Neapolitan army in June 1799. On 23 June the Hamiltons and the King returned to the Bay of Naples in the Foudroyant with Nelson, who at once renounced the truce that Ruffo had agreed with the French and the Jacobin elements of Naples, and proceeded to satisfy Maria Carolina's thirst for revenge. For a month Naples was ruled from the Foudroyant. Hamilton and Emma were once able to go ashore and to see for the last time their 'despoiled house in town and the villa Emma that have been plundered'.66 Throughout these proceedings Hamilton's role was weakly played; he followed Nelson, whose diplomacy was less enlightened than his own had been. Emma, meanwhile, remained constantly, but unofficially, concerned with Maria Carolina's fortunes and Nelson's heart. Nelson, the Hamiltons and the King returned in triumph to Palermo on 5 August. Nelson was made Duke of Bronte and the Hamiltons received valuable gifts from Ferdinand. But Hamilton was now exhausted, his health 'very much broken and his frame is so feeble that even a slight attack of bile, to severe fits of which he has lately been subject, may carry him off', wrote the British consul, Charles Lock.67 In January 1800 Nelson's commander-in-chief, Lord Keith, summoned him to Leghorn and called him and Lady Hamilton 'just a silly pair of sentimental fools'.68 In the same month Hamilton was recalled from his diplomatic post. Though the recall was doubtless due to ill-health and Emma's behaviour, it was said officially that he was retiring at his own request. He took his official leave on 22 April and the next day sailed with Nelson and Emma on a cruise to Malta, in the course of which Emma discovered her pregnancy by Nelson. They returned to Palermo and then, on 10 June, sailed for Leghorn with the Queen, her three unmarried daughters, Prince Leopold, Mrs Cadogan and Cornelia Knight. The party travelled overland from Leghorn to Vienna, the progress one of triumph for Nelson and Emma and of suffering for Sir William. They arrived in London on 9 November 1800.  To help maintain this remarkable ménage à trois (tria iuncta in uno was the convenient motto of the Bath, the Order of which Hamilton was a knight), Hamilton sold his collection in 1801 (Christie's, 27-8 Mar., 17-18 Apr.), but his remaining vases were bought en bloc by Thomas Hope of Deepdene. Emma's daughter by Nelson, Horatia, was born in January or February 1801; a second child, born at the end of 1803 lived only a few months. Hamilton had died in April 1803 and Nelson was killed at Trafalgar in 1805, leaving Emma unsupported. She died in drink and debt in France, and her daughter married an Anglican clergyman.
Hamilton was sent to Italy as a boy by Robert Adam and studied in Rome under Antonio Zucchi, 'but this tour was made when he was too young to receive any material benefit from it'.1 He may be identified with the 'Monzu Amilton - studente Inglese -15' staying in the Piazza Mignanelli in 1767,2 see Alexander (b. c.1748).
Recommended to 7th Earl of Elgin as one with 'much good sense and a great activity of mind' he sailed with Lord Elgin's embassy to Constantinople in 1799. They docked for two weeks at Palermo in October when Hamilton was left behind to seek artists and musicians to join the embassy. He was accompanied in his quest by the artist Lusieri. They visited Naples and Rome and after a month had recruited a figure painter, Theodor Iwanovitch, an architectural draftsman, Balestra (like Hamilton a cripple), and two men 'for casts'. They returned to Palermo in December but were unable to sail for Constantinople for four months due to a lack of transport ships in time of war.1 He was presumably the Mr Hamilton of whom Lord Elgin had recently heard from Sir William Hamilton in Naples in January 1800.2
On 7 May 1761 James Gray in Naples wrote to Horace Mann in Florence introducing Mr and Mrs Hamilton: 'I part with him with much concern but as he leaves us upon so good an occasion as the possession of a good estate' (SP 105/313, f.484).
Robert Adam saw Hamilton in Florence in February 1755,1 and 'Mr Hamilton' was in Rome on 26 March.2

A lively, good natur'd young Man', he was related to Lord Bute, and had served as a Prussian officer before 1757.1 In 1758 he enlisted as an officer with the Venetian Republic, but a year later still had not agreed 'a suitable Pension', owing, it was said, to the fact that he 'sett so great a Value upon his military Merritt'.1 While he was in Venice he was often with General William Graeme, with whom he frequently met Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. She recorded him in Leghorn in May 1758, Vicenza in September 1758, and in Venice and Padua between August 1758 and June 1759; in November 1760 'poor Mr Hamilton' was in St Petersburg.2

Richard Kaye and Mr Hamilton were newly arrived in Florence on 10 November 1763 when James Martin saw them; Martin dined with a Mr Hamilton in Rome on 23 December (Martin jnl.MSS).Mr Hamilton from Ireland arrived in Turin with William Brabazon Ponsonby in May 1764.1 In November 1764 James Martin met Mr and Mrs Hamilton in Florence.2
Mr and Mrs Hamlyn, a middle-aged couple, were in Rome in February 1790, Elizabeth Gibbes calling on Mrs Hamlyn on the 5th.1 Mr and Mrs Hamlyn stayed in Venice between 12 and 22 May 17902 and they had lately returned from Italy in July.3



William Hammond was acting as consul in Naples, in succession to John Fleetwood, in May 1723,1 and was presumably the Mr Hammond described by Rawlinson as deputy British consul at Naples on 4 August 1721, and the 'Wm. Hammond' whose name Rawlinson found (on 29 July) scratched at the entrance to the Catacombs in the church of S.Gennaro in Naples.2 Edward Allen succeeded him as consul in 1726. He may also have been the William Hammond who wrote from Naples to the Royal Society in London on 7 March 1732 on behalf of his partner John Green (perhaps indicating they were merchants) concerning the discovery of Herculaneum.3
Hammond's visits to Naples, Rome and Florence are recorded in the Ramsay jnl.MSS. On 14 March 1784 he said he was leaving Florence with Mrs Hannah Long, but it appears she left on the 19th with James Dawkins of Standlynch; Hammond had departed on the 18th.


Hampden was three times in Italy, on each occasion accompanied by his first wife. On 15 August 1770 a letter for him was forwarded from Turin to Florence,1 and in December the Hampdens had reached Naples. Mrs Hampden went to see the eruption of Vesuvius escorted by Sir William Hamilton, who was much struck by her beauty.2 The Hampdens spent much of 1771 in Rome, James Byres recording their presence in May and September, when he suggested that Hampden was hopeful of succeeding Sir William Hamilton as minister at Naples.3 In October 1771 Mrs Hampden sat to Batoni for a whole-length 'in the character of a Priestess sacrificing to a Hymen'; it was well advanced by December, but then described as being 'in the character of a Nymph or priestess sacrificing to the Genius of Musick'.4 Patrick Home saw portraits of Mr and Mrs Hampden in Batoni's studio in April 1772,5 but the portraits are now untraced. The Hampdens were expected in Florence on 12 October, but they stayed less than a week.6 In that time Mrs Home, who went to the opera with Mrs Hampden, thought them 'the maddest of mad people' and mentioned their departure for Bologna and Venice.7 Lord Findlater, who had much regretted their departure from Florence for 'Venice & the Tyrol', heard late in November that Mrs Hampden had been very ill in Venice and she and her husband were going to pass the winter in Pisa.8  Hampden had succeeded as 2nd Viscount Hampden when he embarked with his wife on his second tour in 1784-5. By January 1785 they had arrived in Naples with Mrs Trevor,9 the wife of Lord Hampden's younger brother John, then British minister at Turin. Lady Hampden gave an elegant ball and supper, and in February she attended a Royal Grande Chasse with Lady Clarges.10 By the end of March they were in Rome, Lord Hampden playing profligately at cards (he had 'lost 3 or 400 at Naples').11 They were apparently still in Rome at the end of May, with the Trevors and Lady Clarges, intending to pass the summer in Switzerland,12 but Horace Mann reported Lord Hampden, 'Lady Hamden and her sister-in-law, Mrs Trevor' in Florence early in July.13 In October 1785 Lord and Lady Hampden were intending shortly to set out for England from Lausanne.14 In May 1788 Father Thorpe described meeting Lord and Lady Hampden on the road between Loreto and Rome; he commented that 'the number of their attendants and the weight of their necessary luggage obliged them to travel very slowly'.15

A merchant at Leghorn, Hanbury signed a memorial dated 30 April 17041 and died in Leghorn on 13 April 1716.2 Two Hanburys signed a letter approving a new British chaplain for Leghorn in 1710,3 and a William Hanbury was reported to have died at Leghorn in 1716.4


A Mr Hankin was in Rome during the winter of 1785-6.1 This was presumably George Hankin, the friend of Thomas Jenkins in Rome, where he was recorded in May 17912 and October 1792.3 In April 1793 he was described as a rich Englishman living in Nice.4 Charles Tatham in Rome was commissioned to design a roundhouse for George Hankin, 'an Englishman of Fortune' in 1794,5 and mentioned him again in June 1795.6 At one time Hankin was engaged in trying to get Raffael Morghen to engrave Leonardo's Last Supper at Milan, commissioning the French artist André Dutertre to prepare the engraver's drawing.7

Thomas Hanmer of Fenns Hall, Flintshire, was in Italy in 1728. He bought books in Florence, and drawings (by the Carracci and Guido Reni, and copies from Raphael and Guido Reni) in Bologna through A. Bosatti, who wrote to him in Turin in February that year.1  He was possibly the 'Thomas Hammer' in Rome in June 1726, who that October brought to Rome an Irishman, Chichester Willoughby (who was to enter the Pretender's service). On 21 December Hanmer was about to leave for England, Stosch said, his conduct having been 'very correct'.2
Hannay, about to go out to India, was recommended to John Strange in Venice by James Capper in London in a letter of 12 June 1778;1 he was presumably the Hannay with a Mr Wilkinson in Florence in November and December that year.2



Simon Harcourt was in Padua in April or May 1706,1 and was presumably the Mr Harcourt in Italy in 1707-8. In October 1707 a Harcourt, just returned from Florence, was to deliver a package from Rome to Naples.2 On 3 December 1707 James Gibbs recorded a Mr Harcourt, an English gentleman, in Rome,3 and at Easter 1708 'Sigre Harcourt' was listed living in the Strada della Croce with 'Sigr.Giacomo Paret'[?].4
A most amiable serious fine gentleman of good nature & good sense',1 Lord Harcourt made the grand tour with the antiquarian and traveller Walter Bowman (whose letters supplement his own). After spending two years in France he arrived in Turin at the end of October 17322 and in January 1733 he was in Milan, dividing his time 'twixt study, and assembly, and operas'.3 In mid-February he was in Genoa and in March in Florence.4 He wrote to his sister from Siena on 2 September, describing the ladies there as 'more numerous and beautyfull than in any other place I have yet seen; very polite to strangers, as indeed they ought to be, the gentlemen of their own country being by far the oddest, unaccountable creatures that can possibly be seen'.5 He reached Rome by the end of October,6 and was staying on the east side of the Piazza di Spagna the following Easter.7 Bowman wrote from Rome on 22 April,8 but they must have left soon afterwards, going through Bologna and Parma to Venice. Harcourt is said to have viewed the battle of Parma (an action in the War of the Polish Succession) from the ramparts of that town,9 and in Venice in June he was described as understanding 'as much of the art of war as any man in England that has no experience of it'.1 In July and August he passed through Vienna and Dresden and he was back in England by the end of the year.10
Hardwick's corpus of architectural drawings (RIBA), sketchbooks (RIBA and priv.coll.) and scrapbooks (RIBA), together with his Neapolitan journal (Hardwick jnl.MSS) provide a relatively full picture of his movements abroad.1 His tour was self financed. He travelled from Paris to Rome with Thomas Jones, whose Memoirs record almost every step of the outbound journey, and the two remained frequent travelling companions during the remainder of 1776 and most of 1777. Passing over Mont Cenis early in November 1776, they made brief stops at Turin, Milan, Bologna and Florence, reaching Rome on 27 November. James Byres immediately introduced them to the British artist community at the Caffe Inglese.2 Byres's architectural interests would have made him a natural mentor for Hardwick, whose scrapbook album VII in the RIBA contains copies of drawings of the Roman imperial baths made from Byres's originals. Soon, however, Hardwick moved into the circle of Thomas Jenkins, Jones referring to Hardwick being at Jenkins's villa near Castel Gandolfo on two occasions (11 May and 4 September 1777). One Hardwick sketchbook (RIBA) records the view from the house and a porphyry vase in the owner's collection; another (RIBA) includes a 'Design for a Villa Make out this for Jenkins'. In general, however, such references to original architectural designs are rare compared to the plethora of measured drawings Hardwick produced, beginning in 1777.  Usually Hardwick worked in association with another architect to facilitate the actual measuring procedure. Such a pooling of resources also increased the opportunities of making copies of the other person's drawings, and Hardwick's grand tour is mainly remarkable for the insights it provides into such practices. On one early occasion Thomas Jones recalled the arrival late on 10 November 1777 of 'Hardwick & Sig'r Giacomo [Quarenghi], both of them Architects'. The following day the trio set off 'attended by Our Cicerone with a basket of Provisions down to the Villa Adriana - where we took the dimensions of some of the Apartments - made Sundry Sketches - and dined there'. A Hardwick drawing, signed and dated November 1777, is virtually identical with a Quarenghi watercolour in Bergamo.  The following spring Hardwick set out on a seven weeks study trip to Naples, Caserta, Herculaneum, Pompeii, Portici, and Paestum. The painter John 'Warwick' Smith accompanied him to Capri on 23 May and on 2 June to Pozzuoli to 'meas. the Temple of Serapis'. Christopher Baynes went with him to Paestum and Salerno; Hardwick also took copies of drawings of the palace at Caserta, and of the Pompeian Isis Temple according to earlier surveys by the engineer in charge of excavations, Francisco La Vega, and a former colleague from William Chambers's office, Edward Stevens (RIBA drawings). In a letter written to Stevens in Rome in 1774, just before his death, Chambers warned 'Naples has never been famed for A[rchitects] they are now I apprehend worse than ever you will See some [exec]rable performances there ... avoid them all' (see Chambers). Hardwick seems to have known this letter from the widow Stevens and, without questioning its validity, to have taken the advice to heart. His journal is sprinkled with remarks about the 'bad' and 'execrable' architecture he saw, and 'the very wretched State of the Arts in Naples & what poor Encouragement is given to them'.  Returning to Rome on 7 June, Hardwick soon met his former classmate from the RA, John Soane. The pair engaged in an extensive and mutually beneficial partnership of sorts, which lasted much of the summer. On 16 June they collaborated in measuring the ground plan of the church of S.Maria Maggiore. Soane preserved the master sheet with all the dimensions, and from it each architect produced his own neatly signed copy without mentioning the name of his partner. Soane allowed Hardwick to copy his plan of S.Agnese fuori le Mura done on 21 May during Hardwick's absence. But in general, Soane received the better half of the bargain, because Hardwick permitted him to copy his earlier surveys of such major monuments as the Pantheon and the Colosseum, to which he had devoted most of his time during 1777. Soane even produced a watered down version of the Hardwick and Quarenghi views of Hadrian's Villa. But the partnership disintegrated before Christmas over a dispute involving Soane and Hardwick's erstwhile companion and collaborator, the architect John Henderson, with whom he had made an excursion as recently as late November to draw the Palazzo Farnese at Caprarola (see Henderson).  Despite the assiduousness with which he measured monuments both ancient and modern, Hardwick appears to have derived no great benefit from his Italian visit. He had taken no part in foreign competitions, nor did he seek honorary membership in Italian art academies. Most surprising of all, he attracted little if any attention from visiting English tourists.
Hardy accompanied George Berkeley round Rome, with St George Ashe, Compton Domvile and Thomas Tyrwhitt.1 He was presumably the Charles Hardy who was in Padua on 13 May 1717, also with Tyrwhitt.2




Francis Hare-Naylor was witty, cultivated and insolvent, his wife Georgiana beautiful and accomplished. She was also cousin of Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire, who was alleged to have contrived the marriage and then to have rescued them with an annuity of £200. The Hare-Naylors left for the Continent soon after, first to Carlsruhe and then to Italy, where they are first recorded in Florence in November 1787.1 They spent some ten years in Italy, in the course of which their four sons were born (Augustus, the second, in Rome on 17 November 1792, Julius, the third, at Valdagno on 13 September 1795). While Francis appears to have remained quietly occupied reading the classics (between March 1791 and September 1793 he corresponded with Bodoni, asking him for copies of all the classical authors he had published),2 it was the cultural activities of his wife which attracted notice.  Already in January 1788 she had applied for permission to copy Guercino's Samian Sybil in the Uffizi,3 but it was in Rome that her presence came to be felt. By November 1791 at the Hare-Naylors' Thursday conversazioni 'many of the artists meet, & mix with the great':4 Prince Augustus, Lady Cowper, Durno, Canova and Lady Hatton being among their guests.  By then Mrs Hare-Naylor had become something of a critical force among British artists in Rome. In April 1791 Irvine had described how 'Head has been strenuously supported by a Mrs Naylor who has been very severe and acrimonious in her criticisms on Robinson who has written her a card begging she would not honour him so highly with her attention'. Irvine also alleged that Head had set her against 'poor [John] Taylor by which he has got several commissions he might otherwise have been without'.5 Charles Grignion related that she called Head and his wife 'Her Angels',6 and Hewetson included her among the 'Practical Dilettanti, who presume to guide nostri benefattore Ignoranti': she favoured Head and Flaxman and 'one of two other Artists with a fair word, but damns all the rest to a man'.7  Her name occurs regularly in Mrs Flaxman's diary between February 1791 and April 1793. In April 1791 the Hare-Naylors gave a 'grand dance' for 'all the English Gentry', and Flaxman made a caricature drawing of it.8 In 1792 Mrs Hare-Naylor commissioned from Flaxman the celebrated series of illustrations to Homer's Iliad and Odyssey (see Flaxman). In November 1794, after the Flaxmans had left, she was embroidering for them a carpet based on a Roman mosaic.9 In 1795, among the possessions of James Durno at his death, were a number of pictures 'marcato Neilor' and 'un quadro rappresentante il figlio del Sigre Nayler'.10  The Hare-Naylors subsequently settled near Bologna, Naylor writing to Bodoni from Tajano on 29 June and 13 July 1793. In August 1793 they were at Valdagno, near Verona, giving their postal address as chez M.Albertini à Verona.2 They passed through Verona from Valdagno on 1 November 1795, leaving for Bologna on the 3rd.11 On the death of Hare-Naylor's father, they returned to England in 1797 with their second son Augustus. Their other three sons were left in Italy and were finally fetched home by their parents in 1799 (DNB).


Captain Harland with his wife and two very pretty and accomplished daughters' were staying in Florence in March 1770.1 The daughters spent a year in Florence and talked 'French & Italian immensely well'.2 He had three daughters: Frances (d. 1777, m. 1777 Count Edouard Dillon), Marianne (d. 1785, m. 1783 Maj.-Gen. William Dalrymple), and Susanna (m. 1785 Sir William Rowley).
Mr Harper and Dr William Gilkes were noticed by Alexander Drummond in Venice in August-September 1744;1 he was probably the John Harper in Padua on 6 August 1745.2


Harriman was dealing in property in Leghorn from 1719/21, when he was head of the Harriman firm1-presumably Gould, Harriman & Fuller (see James Harriman). His name, with those of consul Burrington Goldsworthy, John Aikman and Henry Ragueneau, is inscribed on the wall of the Protestant cemetery at Leghorn as one 'Deputed by the Nation to Oversee the Work' [of establishing the cemetery in 1746]. In September 1758 Horace Mann applied for a passport for Francis Harriman and his fellow merchant John Abbott to go to England for a few months.3 He died at Leghorn in December 1762.4
Founder of the Harriman firm of merchants in Leghorn,1 referred to in the accounts of Thomas Coke in 1717 as Messrs. Gould, Harriman & Fuller.2 In January 1721 James Harriman, 'faithful in the service of the nation and more than 30 years experience in this Countrey, & has a good Purse', was left as consul at Leghorn vice John Fuller.3 He was buried in Leghorn aged 78 in 1737.4




Spence met Harris sometime between 23 August 1732 and April 1733 in Florence,1 where he was a member of the Freemason's Lodge.2 He was in Naples with Thomas Archer during the winter of 1732-3, when he celibrated Solimena's double portrait of Mrs Strangways-Horner and her daughter with some verses.

Mr Harris, 'a very animated sensible man' and Mrs Harris 'not so striking', were seen by Elizabeth Gibbes in Siena at the beginning of May 1790.1 Mrs Harris was possibly the daughter of Sir James Douglas, the British consul at Naples.
Harrison left Vienna on 18 September 1725, to take leave in Naples, and he did not return.1 He had left Venice for Naples by 19 October 1725.2 Stosch observed his movements thereafter: 'Major Harrison' was in Rome on 3 November 1725, and was shortly leaving for Naples; on 9 March 1726 'Colonel Harrison, Resident of the King at Vienna' had been several days in Rome and was returning to Naples; on 26 April 1727 Colonel Harrison had come to Rome from Naples and was 'to continue his journey'.3
Harrison was sent to Italy to study by Sir Thomas Dundas of Aske.1 Dundas initially decided to send George Cuitt, son of a builder working on his house, having been impressed by the young man's painting, but on hearing that Cuitt proposed to share his travel allowance with his friend Harrison, Dundas doubled the amount in order to support them both. Their route to Rome is not known, but they were lodged in the Strada Laurina in 1770 and in 1775 the two were still together with a 'Mr Pidry'[?] in lodgings facing the Piazza di Spagna.2 Most of the evidence for Harrison's activities in Italy exists in the form of a large number of drawings preserved in Chester CRO. They present certain difficulties, however, as most of them duplicate images which Harrison could have found in previously published sources, especially Palladio's Quattro Libri, but notes on the back of some suggest that they were either made, or at least referred to, in situ. It is thus clear that by July 1769 Harrison was examining the famous temples of the Republican, Imperial and Boarium fora. In the spring of 1771 he evidently met the Bishop of Derry at Rome,3 and at some stage, possibly as early as 1770, Harrison prepared drawings for converting the Vatican Cortile Belvedere into the museum of antiquities which the new Pope, Clement XIV, was contemplating. The scheme was described by Francesco Milizia in 1773: Harrison had proposed to close in the court with a colonnade all the way around supporting a cupola with a light source in the manner of the Pantheon. The drawings and a wood model were shown to the Pope, but rejected as too 'chimerical'.4 The museum (Museo Clementino) was eventually to be built to the designs of Michelangelo Simonetti. Harrison's acquaintance with Clement XIV, however, was to lead to a series of dramatic events in 1773 when he entered the second Concorso Balestra of the Accademia di S.Luca.5 The subject was to systematise the Piazza del Popolo; designs were submitted on 20 April 1773, and the prova examination (for which the subject was chosen by James Byres) was the following day. On 22 April the victor was declared to be Domenico Lucchi and the runner up Saverio Marini, both pupils of Roman architects. Harrison, feeling the decision was not impartial, immediately approached the Pope asking that his drawings might be displayed to the public alongside the those of the prize winners, a request which the Pope granted. On 2 May the academicians decided to send the Pope a memorandum concerning their award, but opinion was firmly behind Harrison, and at an audience held on 11 May he presented a second document to the Pope, 'throwing himself at his feet' and asking that the Pope might compel the professors of S.Luca to elect him Accademico di Merito. Remarkably, the Pope acceded to this request,6 and on 6 June Harrison was elected. Harrison was required to attend the following congregation, but he neither attended on 11 July nor on the occasion of any other congregation during his time at Rome. Harrison was not asked for the donation of a piece of work, nor were his concorso drawings retained by the academy (the elevations and sections are now in Chester CRO). The events were described in the city's news bulletin of 19 June, including the fact that the Pope had presented the architect with two medals, one in silver and the other in gold (Chester CRO).7 According to Harrison's first biographer, writing in 1863 apparently with information from the architect's daughter, the Pope subsequently commissioned his young protégé to make a design (which was not used) for the new sacristy he proposed to build for St Peter's basilica.8  Harrison visited Pola in Istria9 and he was presumably the Thomas Harrison who arrived in Venice on 12 September 1776.10 He had returned to England by the end of the year.
Commodore Harrison sailed from Plymouth with the Duke of York in the Centurion in 1763.1 He arrived in Genoa on 29 November 1763, and was nominally acting as British minister there 1763-6, in which period he paid several visits to Malta.2 He was the 'most excellent character, well tempered obliging & humane', whom John Holroyd saw in Turin in July/August 1764; during that time Harrison went on an expedition 'up the Country' from Genoa; in June 1765 Harrison and Holroyd sailed from Naples to Marseilles,3 apparently with Philip Changuion.4
Mr and Mrs Harrison and their daughter had been in Naples before Sir William Forbes met them in Rome on 1 April 1793; they introduced Forbes to Sir John and Lady Legard1 (Mrs Harrison being the aunt of Sir John's wards, Maria and Emily Grimston, see Sir John Legard). 'La Famiglia Harison Inglese' was in Venice from 19 to 25 May.2 They arrived in Florence on 18 September and consorted regularly with John and Harriet Carr (who noted the Harrisons had 'spent the last winter in Italy'). By the end of May 1794 Mrs Harrison had suffered a serious illness, but by 4 July she had departed with her husband, travelling slowly and intending to go to Switzerland; the Carrs were proposing to join them later.3
Harrison acted in Rome as cicerone for the 5th Earl of Carlisle who described him as 'a very good man, and a very instructing one'; he was going to leave for England when he had completed Carlisle's instruction and they intended setting off together through 'Perugia, Venice, Verona, Padua, etc.' (Jesse, Selwyn, 2:308; 17 Jun. 1768).
Lord Harrold made his grand tour with J. Gerrard, and their letters to his father, the Duke of Kent, furnish their itinerary.1 The Duke was then remodelling Wrest Park according to designs prepared by Leoni, and much of the travellers' time was occupied in pursuing designs and works of art for the new house.2 Hearing of their interests, the King of Sicily ordered his architect Filippo Juvarra to wait upon Lord Harrold in Turin in October 1715, but it was only in August 1716, when they were about to leave Italy, that the architect's comments arrived, in the form of a commentary on Leoni's proposals and sketches of his own new design. 'He says he has taken all the pains he Could to Make the house Commodious and Magnificent', wrote Gerrard; 'he hath made the hall oval, that figure being more decent and proper for the use of company' (27 Jun. 1716). His proposals were not adopted and Wrest Park, in the event, was not rebuilt.3 Their principal commissions for works of art, two history paintings from Giuseppe Chiari and two bronze reliefs from Soldani, followed close upon Lord Burlington's from the same artists.  In Rome Chiari was asked to paint The Meeting of Dido and Aeneas and The Death of Dido, Andrew Fountaine assisting in the choice of subjects (Gerrard, 29 Feb. 1716); each was to be five feet wide, as were those for Lord Burlington, Lord Harrold commented (22 Feb. 1716). Chiari seemed 'well pleased with the subjects which he saith he will Study very exactly', wrote Gerrard (ibid.), who then expressed concern over historical accuracy, such as in the dresses of the Trojans and Carthaginians, 'a thing which hath often been neglected' (11 Apr. 1716); he persuaded the antiquary Francesco Ficoroni to advise on these matters for, Gerrard explained, 'the truth is Sr G Chiari is one of the best painters in Rome, but he hath not much reading and wants to be helped in these sort of things' (31 Jul. 1716). Chiari's progress was slow-'he has so much business that one cannot get him to go on as one could desire' (13 Jun. 1716). As for Soldani in Florence, his 'works go off so well that he hath nothing by him', said Gerrard. But Soldani suggested that, instead of subjects from ancient history as Lord Harrold proposed, an episode from English history would be appropriate (24 Jul. 1716), with the addition of Kent's 'arms and devise' (31 Jul. 1716). Sir Thomas Dereham and Lorenzo Magnolfi offered to oversee the work after Lord Harrold had departed (15 Aug. 1716).  It appears that both commissions fell down on grounds of cost. The Duke of Kent considered Chiari's fee of 700 Roman crowns (£180) unreasonable; it was, confirmed Gerrard, 'more than his Master Carlo Maratti ever had for pieces of that size', and a figure for which 'your Grace might have severall coppys of Some of the finest pictures in Rome' (11 Jul. 1716). 'I doubt not but that he must content himself with the half of it', reflected Gerrard, who continued 'Sr Soldani's work tho not so dear in proportion, still is valued pretty high, the virtuosi in that Country seem to think they can never ask too great a Price for what is to be sent into England' (26 Sep. 1716). It was doubtless with such factors in mind that Gerrard mentioned copies of antique statues, much cheaper than bronze or marble, being made in Florence from a composition of 'powdered Marble and Cement which grows very hard and takes a fine polish' (24 Jul. 1716).  In Rome Harrold had followed a course of antiquities and had an Italian and an architecture master (18 Apr. 1716). He had 'been buying many of the Curiosities of this Country which', wrote Gerrard, 'soon take up a good deal of money' (21 Nov. 1715), in particular 'medalls and Intaglios, which is an endless expence and very great hindrance to More necessary Knowledge and Improvement' (27 Jun. 1716). Gerrard, with the help of Fountaine, constrained him a little, so that Harrold bought mainly architectural prints and engravings of paintings, a set of bronze busts of the Roman Emperors, and new rather than old editions of classical authors, the sounder text being both cheaper and more serviceable (18 Apr. 1716). At the end of his tour Gerrard described Harrold as inclined to retirement rather than business, due to 'a certain manque du monde, which is not yet quite got over'; 'now his Lp hath finisht his Tour of Italy and Satisfied himself with Seeing every Thing he was told deserved his Curiosity, tho it did not allways prove so, yet it occasioned a good deal of expence' (21 Aug. 1716).

On 27 July 1757 Hart signed a memorial from the British merchants of Naples,1 and his name also appeared below a Sentimento dei Negozianti Inglesi a Napoli of 1765 and an Avviso in 1767.2 In 1774 Sir William Hamilton described him as the principal British merchant at Naples.3 Philip Francis had dined with him in September 1772;4 the Ramsays met him several times between 14 April and 30 May 1783, Hart lending them his translation of Lucian,5 and Hart was seen dining with Hamilton in 1788.6  He was presumably the English banker in Naples who had married an Italian lady, formerly a nun.7 In June 1777 Swinburne had recorded in Naples that 'there is a Mrs Hart here, who was a nun in Milan; she is of the Pietra family, and eloped with an Englishman'.8 By January 1787, when Emma Hart (later Lady Hamilton) attended a banquet at his house, he was nearly blind; this did not prevent him being captivated by her, particularly her renderings of airs by Handel.9
Mr Hart died in Florence in September 1756, 'happy in not knowing his danger to the very last moments of his life, and assisted by the most tender wife'.1 'Poor Mrs Hart', wrote Richard Phelps, was 'inconsolable'.2 She was presumably the Mrs Hart, a rich widow to whom Robert Adam briefly paid court in Rome in November 1756, although she had a fourteen-year-old son and her looks were not such as to inspire passion,3 and the 'Madame Giovanna Harz' staying in Venice from 18 April to 18 May 1757.4
The Mr Hart in Capua on 3 and 22 March 1762 with a Mr Wood1 was probably the Thomas Hart who left Venice on 16 June 1762 (the same day as the Duke of Roxburghe)2 and the Mr Hart 'still' in Turin on 3 November.3

He was travelling in Italy with Mr Jeffreys [or Jefferys]. In June 1733 they were proposing to spend some time in Florence, where Brinley Skinner recorded that Hart was 'they say son to Moses Hart [c.1676-1756, from Breslau, merchant in London] the jew'.1 Folkes encountered them several times in Rome in November.2 On 7 May 1734 they were in Padua.3


Lord Hartington was accompanied on his tour by the Rev. Arthur Smyth. He had arrived in Florence by 16 November 1739,1 Lady Pomfret then considering him 'not handsome but well bred lively and agreeable'.2 On 28 December he left for Rome,1 where he stayed at the locanda di Marco Aurelio Celli in the parish of S.Lorenzo in Lucina.3 On 30 April he made an excursion to Naples, and in mid-May left Rome for Venice,4 where he sat to Rosalba Carriera (Chatsworth). In August he was in Milan (where Spence met Smyth), and in September in Alessandria, en route for Genoa.5


Possibly also the 'Hervey' who arrived in Florence on 23 October 1773 (Gazz.Tosc.).

A merchant, one of the main reasons for Harvey's tour through France, Italy and Germany, was commercial, and his journal (Harvey jnl.MSS) frequently reflects his practical good sense.1 It determined, for example, his choice of a portrait painter in Rome. He first visited Batoni (on 28 September), 'the best modern painter very fat', whose prices he found 'uncommonly dear. Sixty sequins [about £30] ye least, then 75 and for a whole length 200'; he then visited other studios: one Mason [Maron?] produced portraits 'like good sign posts', and Labruzzi, before choosing Carlo Marsigli at 8 sequins and Venceslao Verlin for a whole length at 30 sequins. At Castel Gandolfo on 4 October he had an audience with the Pope who, he said, 'rides on horseback & plays billiards every day'. He found the Young Pretender 'almost always drunk', and he did not like the 'common people' in Rome whom he found 'a compound of Pride, roguery, laziness & poverty', while the nobility were 'all for vanity, much ceremonial, but no cordiality'; an Englishman, he concluded, should cry out 'Thanks to ye Gods, I was not born a Roman'.  In Genoa in July he had found visiting picture galleries had its irksome side: he had been given 'lists of ye pictures at ye door which you return on departing, the servants seldom content with 6l. what wretches. I cannot help thinking that Holkham & Houghton rival these places in beauties'. In Florence in August he had met Zoffany in the Tribuna in Florence working on his celebrated painting, and he had perceptively suggested that young Maria Hadfield would 'acquire great reputation in painting'. He passed through Capua on 4 September,2 and at Naples he decided that Sir William Hamilton was 'much more sensible but not so amiable' as Horace Mann. His Italian tour ended in Venice; by then his brain was 'a compound of pictures & antiquities' and he was hoping that 'the good family & Norwich Society will soon make a Modern of me again'.
He was travelling with William Moncrieff. 'Hervey and Mouncriefe' arrived in Venice from Rome in May 1709,1 and the following month 'Will. Harvey' was in Padua with Moncrieff and Lord Charles Somerset (who had been in Venice at the same time as them).2 On 9 May 1710 'Mr Hervey' and 'Mr Mouncriefe' were gain in Venice, having come from Rome.3

Harwood spent over thirty years in Italy, where he was regularly patronised by British visitors. Most of the time he was in Florence, where he died and where Thomas Patch caricatured him as a portly 'drunken Englishman'.1 Shortly before his death in December 1783 he converted to Catholicism.2 These are the only private glimpses of the sculptor, but his work is better documented. Harwood ('Franco Arvol Irghe Sculte 25') was living in the Palazzo Zuccari with Joshua Reynolds and Simon Vierpyl at Easter 1752,3 but he had settled in Florence by the following year when he was working with Joseph Wilton. He was admitted to the Florentine Academy on 12 January 1755 (as 'pittore Inglese', although he was described as 'scultore' in the matriculation account).4 After Wilton returned to England in 1755 Harwood appears to have worked in a studio near SS.Annunziata with Giovanni Battista Piamontini who had made life-size copies of The Wrestlers and The Listening Slave (Dublin, NGI) for Joseph Leeson in 1754.5 In 1758 both sculptors were contracted to make a statue and a trophy to complete the decoration of the Porta San Gallo, Harwood contributing a statue of Equity, installed the following year.6 This prestigious commission encouraged Lord Northampton to order seven busts and two full-sized figures (one in plaster).7 Other commissions followed and Harwood made copies of the Venus de Medici (undated; Spencer House), the Uffizi Apollo (1762; Syon Park) and the Apollo Belvedere (1765; Angelsey Abbey). At the same time he sculpted busts after the antique,8 and one of Cromwell (1759; London art market), but his skill is best attested by the bust of a negro signed and dated 1758 (Getty Mus., Malibu). Piamontini died in 1761 and Harwood acquired his studio, where in time he was to be assisted by Pietro Pisani (who had been his pupil), Pietro Bastianelli and Niccolo Kindermann.9  When the young Canova visited his studio in 1779 he remarked on the large number of assistants, the extensive stock of plaster models, and the prominent use of coloured marbles for many of the vases and chimneypieces in stock.10 Three vases were purchased by Charles Townley in the spring of 176811 and Sir Watkin Williams Wynn bought more (with twelve pieces of marble shaped like books and a chequer table of all sorts of marble) in October 1768.12 A garniture of vases was made for Lord Shelburne (later Marquess of Lansdowne) in 177213 and correspondence between Harwood and Sir John Griffin Griffin in December 1772 (Audley End) includes designs for vases, one of which remains at Audley End. One of Harwood's chimneypieces was made for Catherine the Great's palace at Tsarskoe Selo and others were made after designs by George Dance for Sir Henry Mainwaring14 and, after a design by William Chambers, for Lord Charlemont.15 Sir Lawrence Dundas commissioned both chimneypieces and other objects in 1768-9.16 Payments from the 3rd Earl of Bute in 1770 and 177117 may have been for chimneypieces for Luton Hoo (then being reconstructed by Robert Adam). Chimneypieces for Patrick Home, commissioned in 1774-5 were only completed after much delay, see Home. In 1767 Harwood was commissioned to carve an elaborate monument with a portrait medallion and a life-size figure of virtue for the 3rd Earl Cowper, to commemorate his father (Hertingfordbury Church).13 In 1781 he was commissioned by Horace Mann to design a memorial for Linton in Kent which was never completed18 and in the same year he may also have carved the tomb to Lady Orford for the Protestant cemetery at Leghorn.19

He acquired in Italy a copy of Titian's Venus by Mengs,1 and sat to Batoni for a portrait traditionally dated 1756 (priv. coll.; Clark/ Bowron 196).



He was presumably the 'Hatsell' who in June 1770 accompanied Lord Palmerston, William Pars and Hans Sloane to the Swiss Alps. Palmerston visited Milan on 19 August, probably with Hatsell who set out for England with Sloane on 5 September.  On 7 August 1774 Hatsel arrived in Venice with 'Tomaso Weston', probably the antiquary Stephen Weston.1 They were in Florence on 27 August when Hatsel wrote to John Strange in Venice, regretting that he had not seen him there: 'the meeting of Parliament this year in November will not suffer me to advance to Rome and Naples'; he was to stay another week in Florence before proceding to Lucca, Pisa, Leghorn (where he would stay 'a day or two' with Sir John Dick), Genoa and Turin. He wrote again to Strange from Turin on 17 September, explaining that 'four months is the most I can ever spare out of England, & then from this you must deduct the Journey to the Frontiers of Italy & home again, which comprehends near half the time; I must therefore content myself with seeing Capital Objects, & those en passant. Even if I had more time to spare, I find, after a few weeks absence from England a sort of hankering after home that neither Climate, not Virtu can put an end to'.2
Hatsell was travelling in Italy with his friend Captain David Parry, and Edward Gibbon met them several times in Florence between 20 June and 11 July, when he recorded their departure for Rome and Naples.1 On 29 July James Martin dined with the Abbé Grant, 'Capt. Halsell' and others in Rome, and on 31 July he saw 'Halsell' and Parry.2
Lady Anne was with her husband in Florence in the summer of 1790,1 but he was not mentioned again in Italy, and he died in Bath in November 1793. On her own, Lady Anne achieved a certain notoriety by having an affair with John, Lord Hervey, in Florence and then pursuing Prince Augustus in Naples. On 7 December 1791 an agitated Sir William Hamilton reported from Naples that Lady Anne had 'been living publickly with Lord Hervey at Florence', and that Hervey had brought her 'as far as the Gates of Rome' and 'sent her forward to Naples', where she lived with her sister Lady Elizabeth Monck, 'and the Prince is often at their house'.2 But the English ladies in Naples declined her society and by 27 February 1792 Hamilton was able to report that the Prince 'has very wisely kept clear'.3  Lady Anne was in Rome in March 17934 and by April in Florence,5 where Lady Webster noticed her in July : 'a frolicsome Irish widow bewitched, very pretty, very foolish, and very debauched.'6 In Naples in 1794 Lady Webster, to her great surprise, 'found her in company with Ly. Plymouth, who is the great retailer of anecdotes against this slippery Hibernian, and whom she declared against receiving. Her face is not regularly handsome, her figure enchanting, an airy nymphlike form as youthful as a Hebe. She is, however, past thirty considerably [in fact 31]'.7 On 16 June 1794 the sisters were in Venice with Mr Monck, having travelled from Naples.8





Hawkins had been in Greece in 1787 and on 4 December he came to Messina, where he had to perform a thirty-day quarantine.1 Leaving Messina on 5 February 1788, he was in Naples by the 26th. On 21 May he sent a large box from Rome to Leghorn. He also met Flaxman who thought him 'an honor to mankind in great qualities, and [with] the most valuable acquired accomplishments'.2 He was in Leghorn in August3 and went through Pisa and Florence to Venice, where he may be identified as the 'Giovanni Hawkny' who arrived on 2 September 1788.4 His notebook indicates he was still in Venice on 17 September and that he afterwards visited Bologna and Dresden. He was again in Italy in December 1793, passing through Venice on his way Greece.3 Hawkins's personal servant, James Thoburn, kept a travel diary which described both expeditions through Italy.5


Alexander Hay travelled abroad between 1747 and 1751, spending the greater part of his time in Rome.1 George Chalmers painted a Leda and the Swan for him in Rome in 17512 and Cosmo Alexander copied for him Caravaggio's Woman teaching a Girl to sew.3 He was possibly the 'Alexandre Hay Inglese' passing through Capua on 2 May 1764 on his way from Naples to Rome.4
Alexander Hay had been a portrait painter studying under Medina in Scotland,1 but, as Vertue explained, having acquired a knowledge of works of art and of the great masters, he became a 'great dealer in pictures. marble busts - books &c. bronzes - had been 6 times in Italy on that account, he walked there once of twice afoot'.2 In January 1716 he sent from Rome eighteen pictures and a head to Edward Harley (2nd Earl of Oxford) at Wimpole; on 15 July 1716 in Rome Thomas Coke of Holkham recorded a payment to 'Mr Hays for Drawings', and from Florence on 13 April 1717 he made 'a present to Mr Hays'.3 But on 2 April 1717 Hay, a Scots painter, presumably Andrew, was said to have been with some Jacobites in Venice before going to Padua with William Bowes and a Mr Foster and returning to Venice with Foster; he was 'to goe to England or Scotland soon, as he sayes, to sell his pictures'.4  On 17 August 1718 'Mr Hay a painter, lately arrived here [Rome] for the third time' gave John Alexander news of Alexander Crow of Hughhead.5 Hay and Alexander together advised the 2nd Marquess of Annandale on his considerable purchases.6  Hay again set out for France and Italy in May 1720 with a commission from Harley to buy manuscripts. He bought the second half of the Valetta collection of manuscripts (the first having been bought on his previous visit), and a set of 2,420 engraved heads from Padre Orlandi in Bologna, to whom he also gave an account of Jonathan Richardson for the Abecedario.7 At Rome on 24 April 1721 Rawlinson recorded the marriage of a Mr Campbell 'to the sister of Mrs Trotter in the presence of her brother, Mr Andrew Hay, and his wife, and Mr John Smybert, a Scotsman and Painter'. Hay was in Bologna in June 1722, about to leave for Rome.8 He was still in Rome in October 1722, when he was described as one of Mr Kent's friends,9 and 'Andrea Hay virtuoso Scozese' was in Padua on 9 November 1722.10 He had returned to England at the end of that year.  While Hay appears to have started dealing for particular clients, he subsequently bought and sold on the open market, holding frequent sales in London. It is also apparent that while he began dealing in antiquities and works of art, Hay soon came to concentrate on paintings. His name and nationality led to his being suspected of having Jacobite sympathies, but he avoided persecution by appealing to eminent clients, including Sir Robert Walpole. Hay's retirement in 1745 may have been influenced by the rising that year and the wish to avoid further suspicion.
George Hay studied at the Scots College in Rome from 1751 to 1759 and Robert Mylne visited him there in 1755.1 Hay returned to Rome in 1780-1 to raise support for his seminary at Aquhorties which had been built to the designs of James Byres. He left Scotland in August 1780 and in Rome found the Scots College run down and the studies neglected. He sat for his portrait (which remains in the College) and left for home in April 1781.2
Possibly the 'Mr James Hay' listed in Italy in December 1717,3 Hay was appointed one of the Pretender's surgeons in Urbino on 13 Janauary 1718 and was made 'Surgeon to the Household' on 5 September 1725.1 Stosch described 'Hayes' as the Pretender's physician in Rome in October 1723 and August 1726; he also announced his death in Rome in a letter of 17 January 1728.2
Described in his Will as a 'doctor in Physic'1 and the most celebrated of all British 'bear-leaders', Hay was a somewhat dour character, as witnessed by his letters to Lady Compton in 1718-19,2 and by P.L. Ghezzi's caricature drawing of 'Dr Hay' (BMPL, engraved by Pond in 1737). Stosch suspected him of having Jacobite sympathies and in 1723 suggested that he 'should be prevented from conducting young men abroad in future'; in 1730 Stosch wrote that 'Dr Hayes, celebrated Jacobite Scotchman', who had already been to Rome several times, 'seduced a great number of young people who have been in his charge'.3 For his tours see under his charges.
A Protestant Jacobite of the Pretender's inner court, John Hay arrived at Rome from Paris on 26 May 1717; by the 28th he had kissed the Pope's foot (and had found the Pontiff 'a very good jolly man').1 The Pretender told the 6th Earl of Mar (Hay's brother-in-law) that he was 'extremely satisfied with him', and that it was 'a pleasure to be attended by such a one'.2 Hay was listed in Italy in December 1717 and in January/February 1718 was made one of the Pretender's grooms of the bedchamber.3 In 1718 the Pretender made him Earl of Inverness, and Mrs Hay, described by Lockhart as 'a mere cocquet, tollerably handsome, but withall, prodigiouslie vain and arrogant',4 attended the Princess Clementina in Rome.5 Mrs Hay visited France in 1724.6  In 1725 Hay succeeded Mar as the Pretender's secretary and chief adviser. He was made KT, and he and his wife then exerted considerable influence within the factious Jacobite court. 'Mrs Haye', wrote Colman, 'had so absolute a power with the Pretender, that everything was disposed of in the way she would have it',6 and her husband was described as 'cunning, false, avaricious ... altogether void of experience in business'.4 Mrs Hay sat to Trevisani (priv. coll.). They were eventually dismissed from the Pretender's service at the instigation of the Princess Clementina in 1727, but the Pretender then further created Hay Duke of Inverness. They retired to Avignon, where they became Catholics. They returned to Rome in 17307 and were in Pisa in March 1731, leaving for France from Leghorn the following month.8 Hay visited Rome again in 1736, but returned to Avignon where he had bought an estate on 24 July.9 He died at Avignon in 1740.10 Lady Inverness had come to Rome in June 1740 and left Leghorn in October 'to look after the effects of her late husband'.11 Later she was in Rome in 1749, but lived principally with her brother (see Hon. James Murray) at Avignon, where Boswell saw her in 1765.12
When the Young Pretender returned to Rome in 1766 he made John Hay his major domo, and created him a Baronet on 31 December (Charles's birthday). He was dismissed from service in 14 December 1768, together with Adam Urquhart and Andrew Lumisden (Dennistoun, 2:89, 102, 110-12, 119, 308)


A young Scottish violinist whom James Adam heard play in Rome at the Princess Giustiniani's: 'all owned they had never heard such a performance'.1 His arrival in Rome was listed by Hayward as among 'three or four students of musick. Mr Hay from Bath [sic] distinguishes himself greatly'.2 He had been in Naples in January 1761 'greatly admired for his performance & is a genteel well-behaved young man'.3

Mr Haye and his governor Lesley, a Scot', arrived in Rome in May 1725 with letters of introduction to Jacobites.1 Thomas Hay and George Leslie were in Padua on 1 December 1725 with George Seton2 (see George, 5th Earl of Winton).
Captain William Hay was in the employ of the Jacobite court in Rome by February 1725, and on 18 November 1727 he was made groom of the bedchamber (Ruvigny). 'Mr Hay, a brother of Drumelliors' met Allan Ramsay and Alexander Cunyngham in Rome on 20 November 1736; on 14 January 1737 he ('Hay of Drumellier') showed them round the city walls.1 He was presumably the William Hay who attended the Jacobite Lodge in Rome between March 1736 and August 1737,2 and possibly the Captain William Hay whose portrait was painted in Rome by Domenico Dupra, see Sir James Steuart. He was doubtless one of the two Hays recorded at Jacobite gatherings in Rome in December 1737-February 1738 by George Sinclair of Ulbster.3  On 25 June 1740 he was sent from Rome to Scotland by the Pretender; Stosch then described him as the brother of Hay of Drumelder, a young man, 'de forte complexion et de bonne presence' who had 'served the Pretender in Rome as a gentleman'.4 He returned to Italy in November, having made over his Scottish estate to his brother Alexander.5 In April 1741 'Mr Hay of Drumellier Brothers', being involved in two confrontations with English gentlemen, was advised by the Pretender to go to France; William was in Tuscany in June.6 Hay owned four portraits by Blanchet of the exiled Stuarts (Christie's, 25 Mar. 1966).
Dr Hay and his brother the Captain' were mentioned in Rome by Stosch in 1725.1 In April 1731 Captain Hay 'brother to the late James Hay who was surgeon to the Pretender' was reported as having been in Naples with Lord Dunbar [James Murray].2 In November 1731 Captain Hay dined with Godfrey Meynel in Rome, and in December he visited Edward Holdsworth and James Herbert with the Earl Marischal.3
Mr Hay the Son of a Gentleman who Lives about sixty Miles from Dublin' met Sarah Bentham in Rome, Turin and Milan (Bentham jnl.MSS)

Mr and Mrs Hayes and their daughter [sic] were seen in Rome by James Martin, who shared a Papal audience with one of the two Mr Hayes then in Rome, together with Samuel Powel and John Morgan.1 The Hayes family were seen in Florence between 8 and 20 July by Edward Gibbon, who said they had lately come from Rome: 'Mr Hays seems very stupid, his wife rather vulgar. The son [sic] is much better than either'; 'cette famille qui vit peu avec les autres Anglois m'a l'air assez ridicule'.2



Possibly the Mr Haines recorded in Venice in May 1733,1 and the Mr Haynes who met Martin Folkes in Venice the following month.2 He sent Latin verses to Walter Bowman in Rome in November 1733 (see Bowman).
According to his own List, Hayward arrived in Rome in June 1753 and departed on 29 April 1754.1 James Russel reported a 'Mr Heywood' on 31 July 1753 as having arrived in Rome 'about a month ago'.2 On 27 September 1753 he was passing through Capua with the Irish painter Charles Exshaw, either going to or coming from Naples.3 In 1755 Thomas Jenkins from Rome recommended him to Lord Dartmouth as 'a deserving young man. I knew him sometime before and he behaved well'.4

Sir Francis Head was in Rome by November 1723, in close touch with the Archbishop of Canterbury and Sir Robert Walpole concerning the Jacobite court. Soon, however, Stosch suspected Head himself of having Jacobite sympathies.1 In March 1724 Head went to Naples,2 and on 8 May he left Rome for Venice and Vienna,3 passing through Padua on 26 May.4 He was expected back in Rome in December 1724, when Stosch expressed concern for his companion Thomas Mostyn, since Head was now 'outré en théorie et pratique'.5 Mostyn and Head had been in Padua on 22 February 1725,6 and in March Rosalba Carriera in Venice received payment for her portrait of 'Mostin' (untraced).7 That same month the two reached Rome8 and on 19 April began a course of antiquities under Palazzi with Edward Gascoigne and a Mr Dalton.9 In May they left Rome for Florence.10 Plates in Gori's Inscriptiones [1726-43] were dedicated to Head and Mostyn.
Guy Head, a competent history and portrait painter and an accomplished draughtsman, spent twelve years in Italy with his wife and growing family. Within the often fractious colony of British artists in Rome, he appears an independent spirit (and his comparative isolation was perhaps induced by his stutter). His studies abroad had been encouraged by Joshua Reynolds and he had already spent time in Holland and Germany before arriving in Italy in 1787 with the Dutch painter Daniel du Pre. On 25 February 1787 both were elected to the Accademia Clementina, Bologna, to whom Head presented Erminia writing Tancred's name (Bologna). In July Head was elected an honorary member of the Accademia Parmense di Belle Arti, his reception piece being the Blind Oedipus (Parma), and in September he was made an honorary member of the Accademia delle Belle Arti in Florence.1 According to the English traveller James Robson, this last election was due to the quality of Head's copies, his Venus after Titian having been executed 'with such perfect beauty that the Royal Academy [of Florence] had chosen him one of their Body'.2 Head had copied paintings by Guercino and Reni in Bologna and by Correggio in Parma, and Robson also commented on the excellence of Head's copy of the so-called Raphael St John in Florence. Such copies, which contributed so much to Head's reputation, were made at least in part 'with the view of forming a valuable Gallery ... for the Advantage of his own Countrymen',3 but some were sold for high prices, Lord Gardenstone paying £38 for Guercino's Abraham in 1788.4 On 24 September Robson recorded sharing a coach to Leghorn with du Pre and Head, who was in Florence on 29 October, when he wrote a letter of thanks to the Accademia at Bologna.5  Head was in Rome by March the following year, when it was already noted that he had a great many commissions which, wrote Elizabeth Cooper, 'makes the rest [of the British artists] quite mad'.6 The commissions were unspecified, but doubtless included copies, as well as history pieces and portraits. In April 1790 Elizabeth Gibbes noticed in his studio paintings of Echo and Antigone,7 and in May 1791 Hewetson recounted that Head had several portrait commissions 'most of them whole lengths, painted in his usual style, and with most enormous Cravats and marvelous tight Britches'.8  In Rome Head lived with his wife and growing family in the 'Strada Felice, next house to the Palazzo Tomati' (Rome List 1790, 1793); a son was born in 1790, a daughter on 7 February 1792, a daughter died on 13 November 1793, and a boy Thomas was listed in 1792.9 Their rooms were above those of the sculptor Vincenzo Pacetti, who became a close friend, and they remained on good terms with the Flaxmans (through whom Head met Canova in 1792),10 but Head's independence did not make him popular among other British artists. In April 1791 James Irvine wrote that Head was 'determined to stand alone like a great colossus and challenge the whole body of artists to combat and sweep all from the face of the Earth. The sublime Flaxman is now the only one I believe with whom he is on terms of friendship'.11 Head was allegedly disparaging of his colleagues, telling the 4th Earl of Bristol that 'all the English Artists in Roam were most infamously debauched with respect to women and as he was the only exception he was therefore persecuted by them'.12 There was much jealousy within the British colony; Mrs Hare-Naylor 'strenuously supported' Head, and Grignion, who called Head 'Guy of Warwick', thought their behaviour disagreeable, but added that Head kept a very good table.13 He was not, however, destitute of virtue; in 1794 he was happy to join other artists in signing the letter of thanks they addressed to Prince Augustus (Rome List 1794); J.M. Gandy helped him when he was ill in August 1795,14 and on 14 September 1795 he witnessed Durno's will with Hewetson.15 On 7 October 1792 Head was elected accademico di merito of the Accademia di S.Luca, his election secured by Pacetti.16 His presentation piece Iris (of which several versions are recorded) was one of the works singled out in December 1795 by the Director of the French Academy in Rome. He described Head as an English painter 'qui se distingue beaucoup, tant dans les portraits que dans l'histoire'17 and mentioned his portraits of the Hope brothers (Thomas and Henry), John Coxe Hippisley (now priv. coll.) and Lady Webster's son, and other histories-Antigone and a Venus giving her girdle to Juno (Nottingham)18 which, with Echo flying from Narcissus (Detroit),19 is the only large history piece by Head now known to survive (the Iris, and Oedipus being half their size). Other portraits of this period included Lord Camelford (formerly Thomas Pitt)20 and Flaxman, both painted in 1792 (NPG).  Besides his painting, Head was also collecting works of art. He commissioned the copy of an antique statue from Pacetti, a number of drawings from Vincenzo Camuccini and (in 1796) an engraving of a Titian Virgin and Child from Raffaele Morghen.21 He also bought a quantity of pictures and antiquities, as his posthumous sales make clear. The French entered Rome in February 1798 and in May Mrs Head told Mrs Flaxman that while they had lost their house, furniture and wines, 'the Principal things of value are saved, and the day the French entered Rome our last seventeen cases were put on board of the Fluca and the following night she made her escape'.22 It was Pacetti who packed up their collections for them.23 They went to Naples and then, as the French again approached, to Palermo. They met Sir William and Emma Hamilton with Nelson, after whom they named a son born that year (Horatio Nelson Head). Head painted portraits of both Nelson (NPG) and Lady Hamilton (who was said to have thrown a palette at the artist when he tried to explain with his stutter that her foot was too large for a sandal and he was giving it a slipper).24 In the spring of 1799 Head accompanied the British consul general, Charles Lock, on a tour round Sicily.25 Nelson finally arranged a passage home by sea and the Heads arrived back in England in the summer of 1799. In 1800 Head showed at the RA his Iris and Echo and a portrait of the Duke of Sussex (Prince Augustus, which must have been painted in Italy) and he was preparing an exhibition of his own works, originals and copies, and of his collection of old masters, when he died suddenly in December at the age of forty. On 8 April 1803 his widow imported fifty-four 'moderni dipinti dal defuntio suo marito' from Rome.26 Between 1801 and 1810 there were five London sales of his collections which included, besides his own pictures, works by his contemporaries in Italy such as Jacob More, Durno, Kauffman, Flaxman, Philipp Hackert and Ducros; there was also an impressive list of older masters, besides Greek vases, sculptures, coins, medals and gems.

Head was staying in Turin, and his name recurs in correspondence between Collet and Poyntz from 29 December 1778 to 14 August 1779, when he was about to leave. In May he 1779 had paid a brief visit to Genoa,1 but on the 16th he was presented at Court in Turin.2 Swinburne dined with him and Poyntz in Turin in June 1779.3 On 6 March 1780 Mr Head was said to have arrived in Turin with some books for Prince Rezzonico.4 He was again presented at Court on 20 March 1780 with Robert Merry.2
The arrival of the Headforts in Rome was anticipated in October 1780.1 Both sat to Batoni in Rome (Houston; Clark/Bowron 439-40), the Viscount's portrait dated 1782, his Viscountess portrayed with an infant (probably Mary, her firstborn) in her lap; the whole-length portraits were scaled to fit the decoration of Headfort House in Co. Meath. 'Miledi Fordfort' in Rome on 29 November 1783 was conceivably the Viscountess.2
Heams and George Treadway signed the visitors' book at Padua University on 1 May 1710;1 Heams and 'John Treadway' had passed through Venice by 9 May on their way to Holland.2

An English banker in Genoa whom Brooke met in December 1797, 'related to the learned judge of that name' [John Heath, 1736-1816, of Exeter] (Brooke, Observations, 259).
Hedges was envoy extraordinary to Savoy-Sardinia. He arrived in Turin on 7 November 1726 and left on 7 November 1727.1 He briefly visited Rome late in September 1727 and had left for Florence on 10 October.2

The name is variously spelt as Hamson, Hempsell, Hemslow. 'Mr Hemslow', an English merchant in Leghorn, played the flute to admiration.1 In October 1763 in Leghorn James Martin visited 'Mr Hempson', who played 'remarkably well on the common flute'; he was a friend of Nardini who generally lived in the same house.2 In 1765 Farington heard Mr Hamson on the flute and Pietro Nardini on the violin at a concert in Leghorn 'at Mr Earls' [Thomas Earle].3 In September 1770 Dr Burney heard Nardini play with Thomas Linley in Florence 'at a great concert at the house of 'Mr Hempson'.4 On 22 April 1771 John Forbes told William Aikman that he had had the pleasure of meeting in Florence 'an old acquaintance of yours' William Hempsell; 'he is now settled for good and all at Florence and as he is a great lover of musick, he has the famous Nardini in the house with him'.5
Henderson was destined to follow his father's architectural profession of his father David, and was sent to Italy to complete his education. It is usually stated, without much evidence, that John set out on his travels from Edinburgh around 1774, but his itinerary before reaching Rome is uncertain. Once he had arrived there, however, he was noticed by Thomas Jones in his Memoirs. Most of these incidents record Henderson in the company of his English counterpart Thomas Hardwick, as when the two of them ascended to the ball below the cross on St Peter's (13 Jan. 1778), or when, together with Robert Furze Brettingham, they observed Vesuvius in eruption (27 Sep. 1778).1 Thomas Hardwick's own travel journal corroborates some of these movements, although he returned almost immediately to Rome, whereas Henderson lingered on in Naples until 10 November 1778, according to Jones.2 During Henderson's absence from Rome, Soane and the Bishop of Derry had arrived there. The Bishop invited suggestions for a new summer dining room at Downhill, and Soane's novel submission was whispered to be 'a copy of another made by Mr. Henderson ... before my arrival'.3 Sometime between Henderson's return in November and Soane's departure for Naples as the Bishop's protégé on 22 December, Soane requested that the rumours of plagiarism be quelled by an 'objective' comparison of the two competing designs. A kind of architectural duel ensued in which the architects named as seconds their boon companions Hardwick and Brettingham, respectively. No shot was fired and the combatants retired in a state of grudging acceptance from which their friendly relations never really recovered. The fickle Bishop had already made up his mind in favour of Soane. A half century later the urgency of the debate about the competing schemes had hardly diminished in Soane's mind, thanks in part to Brettingham, who recorded the duel's outcome. In a letter written to Soane he mentioned wishing 'to copy that Room you designed for L.d H.... I should like too to have Copies of the others of the Rome [sic for room]'.4 In 1832 Soane illustrated his own version of the dining room with apsidal ends alongside Henderson's plainer one, supposedly derived from the plan of the Pantheon.5 But in truth Henderson should have counted himself lucky to have avoided what Soane later ruefully called 'the magnificent promises and splendid delusions of the Lord Bishop of Derry'.6 According to Jones, Hardwick and Henderson left Rome together. They returned home by way of Venice.7 In 1793 Sir William Forbes exclaimed in the gallery of the Colonna Palace in Rome: 'Poor Henderson, the architect ..., in one of the plans which he drew for the Assembly Rooms at Edinburgh [begun in 1784], had borrowed this idea ... [of] a recess at each end, elevated in this manner and separated by a screen of columns, which would have produced, I doubt not, an excellent effect'.8

Young Mr Heneage', of a landed Catholic family from Lincolnshire, was travelling with Father William Meynell from Vienna to Rome in August 1787. They visited Genoa (where the Fieschi family were related to Heneage through his grandmother) and by 27 October they had been a fortnight in Rome, where Heneage 'found no entertainment'. They went on to Naples in December. In June 1788 Meynell had been 'delivered from his Mr Heneage at Lyons' (Thorpe letters MSS, 22 Aug., 27 Oct., 15, 22 Dec. 1787, 25 Jun. 1788).
Henry was the younger and the more serious of the Pretender's two sons.1 In 1737, while Charles was shooting blackbirds, Henry (wrote Alexander Cunyngham) was 'very grave and behaved like a little Philosopher, I could not help thinking he had some resemblance to his great grd father Charles the 1st'.2 By 1742 his principal activity was prayer, but he was to follow his brother to Paris in 1745. His youthful portrait was taken by Antonio David in 1727 and 1732 (SNPG), by Liotard in 1737, L.-G. Blanchet in 1738 (for the Duchess of Parma, his mother's aunt), and by Domenico Dupra in 1740 and 1744.3 In 1744 Henry had sat to Dupra especially for a portrait for his absent brother; 'tho' it be not quite finished yet it is as like as two droppes of water', he told Charles; 'I have sitt allready for it about 14 Ours'. Batoni copied it in miniature for dispatch to Paris, but, wrote Henry 'to tell you the Truth it is not well copied' and a second copy was taken.4 He returned alone to Rome in May 1747, persuaded (as was his father) that the Stuart cause had been finally defeated at Culloden. On 3 July in St Peter's, Pope Benedict XIV made him a Cardinal, his titular church being S.Maria in Campitelli. The election did not benefit the Stuart cause, nor did it please Charles Edward. Henry was ordained on 1 September 1748 and, his devotion recognised by the Pope, he received rapid preferment. In 1751 he became arch-priest and prefect of the Vatican Basilica with lodgings in the Piazza della Sagrestia, and in 1758 camerlengo of the Papal court and Archbishop of Corinth in partibus, a title he resigned on becoming Bishop of Tusculum (Frascati) in 1761, an office he dutifully fulfilled for forty-six years. In 1763 he became Vice-Chancellor of the Holy Roman Church and in 1803, as the senior Cardinal, Dean of the Sacred College. He sat again to Blanchet in 1748 (Darnaway Castle) and to Domenico Corvi and Sebastiano Ceccarini (Wadsworth Atheneum);5 in 1749 James Russel wrote that he had painted 'the young Cardinal in his habit, as big as the life',6 and Mengs painted him c.1755 (a study for this portrait is at Montpellier).  In 1750 his intimacy with Padre Lercari (his maestro di camera in succession to Leigh, an Irishman, dismissed in 1749) offended his father's sense of dignity and Henry's petulant response displeased the Pope. Henry and Lercari temporarily withdrew to Bologna in 1752, but the affair was over by 1753. Henceforth the Cardinal was to lead a blameless existence. He resided principally at Frascati, in the Villa Muti or the palace of La Rocca which became his favourite residence; he repaired it after 1775 (the Polish artist Thaddeus Kuntz painting frescoes there). He also rebuilt and maintained the Seminary at Frascati which contained a printing press, a reflection of his private activity as a collector of books, manuscripts and musical scores (now in the Vatican Library). He paid particular attention to church music (he had himself been a competent violinist) and had appointed Baldassare Galuppi choir master at S.Maria in Campitelli in 1750. In 1771, 1777 and 1779 he attended the annual prize-giving ceremonies at the Accademia di S.Luca.7 His public life involved a certain outward splendour, and his frequent journeys between Rome and Frascati were conducted at speed in a coach and six with outriders and running footmen dressed in the scarlet liveries of the English Royal House.  His brother Charles had constantly exercised his patience since Culloden. In 1780 Henry helped Charles's estranged young wife enter the same Ursuline convent as his mother, only to learn that she was in love with Count Alfieri and welcomed the temporary roof. He first condemned and then approved Charlotte, Duchess of Albany (Charles's illegitimate daughter by Clementina Walkinshaw), who succeeded in reconciling the brothers in 1784. On Charles's death in 1788 he became the last Stuart Pretender, and while he understood the impossibility of the cause, he nevertheless referred to George III as the Elector of Hanover. A medal bearing his effigy by Hamerani of 1788 (NPG) was inscribed Henry IX with the motto non desideriis hominum sed voluntate Dei. The last attributable picture of him appears to be the pastel by H.D. Hamilton (NPG) of c.1786; later images, showing him with the Crown, remain anonymous.8 Henry presided over the Papal conclaves of 1758, 1774-5 and 1799. At the French invasion in 1798 he fled to Naples, Messina and finally in 1799 to Venice (where he summoned the conclave of 1799-1800 on the island of S.Giorgio). The French wars deprived him of his revenues, and he had sold much of his private treasure to support Pius VI, but in 1800 he was rescued from penury by a pension from George III (instigated by John Coxe Hippisley). He was able to return to Frascati in the summer of 1800 and he hardly left it again. He entertained the Pope there in October 1802, but stoutly refused to accompany him to Paris in 1804 for the coronation of Napoleon. He died at La Rocca on 13 July 1807 and was buried alongside his father in St Peter's. Canova's monument in St Peter's to James, Charles and Henry, commissioned by the Pope and sponsored in part by George IV, was completed in 1820.
Is Jo: Henry at Rome now? Is he as fine a gentleman as ever ... or is he more affected since he has trod on classic ground, seen every court, heard every king declare his royal sense of Operas and the fair.' R. Marlay's letter from Dublin to Lord Charlemont in Italy is undated but refers to events of February 1750.1 By that time Henry's uncle, Joseph Leeson, was living in a house near the Piazza di Spagna with 'Monsiu Arvi' and three servants.2 It would seem from Marlay's letter that Henry had already been some time abroad; he had possibly set out with Leeson's son (also called Joseph), who later joined the family party in Rome from the Academy at Turin. In Rome he was caricatured by Ghezzi, a single drawing inscribed Guiseppe Henry Inglese, huomo assai erudite nella antichita e en lettera (Met. Mus. New York), and again in a group with Lord Bruce, Lord Midleton and Henry Martin (Philadelphia MA). His name and the year 1751 were found on the back of the canvas of Reynolds's Parody of the School of Athens (NGI);3 he heads Reynolds's list of sitters and takes the role of Diogenes the Cynic reclining on the steps with his back to the protagonists and the book in his hand is entitled Larry Grog (Laurence Grogan, a Co. Wexford gentleman of Johnstown Castle, a famous piper, whose popular ballad Ally Croker had for it's hero 'an artless young man just come from the schoolery'). In a smaller caricature by Reynolds (NGI), Henry is found seated with a witless expression on his face studying the plans of the Cloaca Maxima while Bruce, John Ward and Joseph Leeson junior are engaged in animated conversation over his head.4 Richard Wilson painted for him a pair of views around Tivoli (NGI) and again his name with the name of the artist and date 1752 were inscribed on the back of the canvases.3 The four paintings by Vernet (seen in his collection 1775), were ordered through Matthew Brettingham in May 17525 after the Leeson party had left Rome, the Leesons for Ireland and Henry intending for Spain. According to Dr James Tyrrell, who seemingly acted as his agent in Florence, Henry spent the summer in Marseilles, 'being afraid of the heats of Spain', but he set out for that country early in October.6 Pictures painted for him by Antonio Joli included views of Aranjuez and Madrid and a bull fight, of which Joli engraved a plate for him, and there were also views in and around Naples.7 Three years later he is heard of at Pisa. Meeting him in January 1755 Robert Adam thought him 'a clever, sensible fellow: he has seen much of the world to purpose'.8 Adam met him again in Florence on 14 May 1757 when Mann spent four hours at his lodgings with 'one Mr Henry, an Irish gentleman of great estate and esteemed traveller of most taste that has been abroad these many years'. A few days later Adam and Mann dined with Henry.9 Among his acquisitions in Florence was a copy in crayon by Charles Martin of the Madonna della sedia, with copies of the Medici Venus and the Dancing Faun (which he presented to the Royal Dublin Society schools in 1786). On 11 January 1761 he was made a member of the Accademia del Disegno in Florence.10 In August Lady Kildare wrote to her husband the news 'Little Joe: Henry is come to England; Lord Charlemont ask'd my leave to present him to me'.11
Henrej' was in Capua on 10 February 1763 returning from Naples to Rome.1 'Enri cavaliere inglese', presumably the same, stayed in Venice from 13 May to 20 June.2
Henshawe told Lord Dartmouth in 1710 that he had lived nearly twenty years in Genoa and that his father had been consul there in Charles II's time.1 He was regarded as 'a very worthy gentleman' and allowed to succeed John Scudamore, his business partner, as English consul at Genoa in September 1710.2 In November 1718 he applied for leave in England, proposing to leave as chargé d'affaires Thomas Papillon, 'my Nephew ... [who] hath been with me several years'.3 Henshawe's death in Genoa was reported on 21 October 1724, when John Molesworth described him as 'an honest man, but so Italianiz'd and so timorous, that I have had frequent complaints of his giveing up the dignity of our Nation as well as the interest of our Merchants'.4



Lord Herbert travelled with the Rev. William Coxe as his tutor and Captain John Floyd as his companion for 'exercise, geography and French'. His father had issued him with rigorous but original instructions (see Pembroke). Coxe recognised Lady Pembroke's aversion for her son 'while he is so young' to go to Italy where 'they scout every idea of decency, & morality, & will give him much too little trouble', and did not himself 'see the necessity of it'.1 They had spent four years in Vienna, Strasbourg, eastern Europe and Russia, before finally entering Italy in 1779 and their tour is described in some detail in Lord Herbert's travel diary and accounts.2  Lord Herbert may have bought two capricci by Guardi in Venice,3 where Coxe left him. He then stopped only a day at Rome ('I run from Ruin to Ruin', he told Coxe) on his way to Naples, where Floyd (now a Major) was recalled to his regiment,4 to be replaced by Major Seigneux, a family friend from Lausanne. In Naples Lord Herbert spent time with Sir William Hamilton ('almost all the most Chosen people of Naples resort to Hamilton's every evening'), Lord Tylney and Lord Maynard, and James Clark was his cicerone. His conscientious (and extremely informative) Italian diary mentions a new hospital for the poor: 'the building is so considerable that it most likely will never see its end, a common fault at Naples to form immense plans, to begin them and never finish' (he also noted that one Raphaeli, a cicerone, steals things). He climbed Vesuvius and visited Paestum with Clark, reflecting how 'it is extraordinary that the remains of such vast edifices ... should not have been discovered until 1755'. He visited Monte Cassino on his uncomfortable journey back to Rome where he stayed at Margherita's.  He was immediately in touch with Jenkins, the Abbé Grant and Hippisley who acted as his cicerone, 'and was so excellent ... that I flatter myself of having seen Rome more completely and to greater advantage, than most of my young countrymen'. At the French Academy he observed 'such horrible taste with such elegant Models before their Eyes', and he took care to meet English artists: Hewetson, Jacob More, Delane, Durno (whose copy of Raphael's Transfiguration was likely to be the last, 'as the Monks of Montorio swear they will give no more permissions for fear some hurt may come') and Thomas Jones (whom he found 'so so'). He sat in regimentals to Batoni; the portrait delivered to Jenkins in November 1779 and sent to England in December 17805 (Clark/Bowron 413; Sotheby's, NewYork, 14 Jan. 1994). He also commissioned an engraved gemstone from Nathaniel Marchant for his mother,6 and received a bust of his friend the King of Prussia from Tresham.  In Florence he attended Mann's Saturday assemblies ('the only Day of the Week, free from Theatre', but he later noted they were discontinued from 13 November), and was struck by Lady Cowper's beauty; he visited the Tribuna in the Uffizi but confessed that 'I am not arrived at that pitch of observation necessary to select good parts of a part'; 'the Gallery in general & particularly the Venus of Medicis had not answered my expectations'.  At the Turin Academy his father had urged him to be 'very attentive to riding, Fencing, & Dancing sans relaché, & I also beg that you would take Tennis in ... Musick & Drawing, you will find there in perfection, & in the Fortification of the Town, have a very noble opportunity of going on hand in hand with Practice & Theory'.7 Lord Herbert duly took tuition in mathematics, Italian and drawing and through Lord Mountstuart attended a Court reception on 19 December: 'eight most tiresome presentations, up stairs, down stairs, this way and that without end ... not one handsome Woman'. On the morning of Sunday 9 February 1780 'nothing was to be heard but cursed noisy Bells calling people to come and listen to different Scoundrels talking unpardonable nonsense out of several Pulpits'. After three months at Turin, he returned home through France.
A very near relative of Ld P[embroke]'s' and a 'Paymaster in India of the Forces', he was travelling back from India with Robert Jarrett late in 1779.1 They were in Rome on 7 November 1779, intending to leave on the 10th; Hippisley accompanied them to Pisa, where they arrived on 24 November and met Lord Herbert. 'Who is this Indian Herbert?', Lord Pembroke asked his son; 'In spite of the spelling of his name, I don't think he belongs to us'. Herbert and Jarrett left for Florence on 28 November but, deciding that Mann did not accord them sufficient attention, left in December. On 19 December in Turin they again met Lord Herbert; the following day Herbert was not well and Jarrett walked with Lord Herbert telling him tales of elephants in India. Jarrett and Herbert had apparently been in Venice by the end of the month (Hippisley, in a letter to Lord Herbert from Rome, 1 January 1780, saying he had received most obliging letters from them both, from Venice). They were back in Turin by 1 January 1780, Herbert almost completely recovered. But by 8 January he had had a relapse and he died on 14 January. He was given a Protestant burial at 'S.John in the Vallee', near Pinerolo, on 16 January, attended by Jarrett and Lord Herbert. Jarrett, who subsequently became a lively correspondent of Lord Herbert's, left Turin on 20 January; he was in Chambray on 23 January and had reached England within three weeks.
Accounts of Lord Herbert's visit to Italy are disjointed and make no reference to his architectural studies. He met Charles Baldwyn and Burrell Massingberd in Frankfurt in September 1711 and in Turin in October.1 On 28 January 1712 'H. Herbert' was in Padua, and the following month he was in Venice,2 where he was 'dangerously ill of a fever' on 13 March,3 but had recovered by 29 April.4 By June he had met William Kent in Rome; late in August he visited Naples, where he met the 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury on 9 September,5 and at the end of October he left Rome with Michael Newton-'so', wrote Kent on 5 November, 'I suppose [they] are at Florence'. In Rome Herbert had commissioned 'a very fine picture of Gioseppi Chiare [Chiari]' (Kent's master).6 In July 1713 he was again in Venice.7
Mr Herbert is a young Gentleman of Oxfordshire, who has a very good estate and Travels under the care of Mr Holdsworth', wrote Elizeus Burges; he was 'a very good natur'd, weak young man' who was 'wholly govern'd by the other' (the non-juror Edward Holdsworth).1 They had arrived in Rome in April 1730; in May they met the Pretender and his son in the Villa Borghese, an event which, according to Stosch, 'looked like a planned meeting', and they were in Tivoli in October.2 A year later they were still in Rome attending a dinner given by Godfrey Meynel.3 Holdsworth, with Herbert, met his friend Joseph Spence in Rome in April 1732, and recounted how he had been robbed; they had left Rome by 1 May.4 They are next recorded in Padua on 16 May 1732 and again on 25 January 1733.5 They were in Venice in March, when the Earl Marischal saw them; Herbert and Holdsworth had then been in Italy '2 or 3 years, and talk now of setting out soon for Vienna'.1

Apparently a Jacobite, he met George Sinclair in Rome and Naples;1 he was possibly the Herbert who initially accompanied George Langton in Italy.



See Sir Robert Herries. On 16 September 1794 Lady Herries arrived in Verona with Charles Sackville ['Mr Jacholle'], a partner in the Herries bank, intending to stay some time.1 She was in Padua on 2 December when Lady Berwick wrote that 'the Partnership between [Lady Herries] & Miss Bowdler is dissolved',2 and on 6 December arrived in Venice with Sackville.3 Sackville died on 18 December, but Lady Herries passed the winter in Venice and was still there on 19 March 1796.4 On 13 April 1796 she arrived from Venice in Padua, again with Miss Bowdler and Mr and Mrs Thomas Clark; she again intended staying for some time.5
Sir Robert was expected in Rome in January 1794 en route for Naples, but he had left his wife in Pisa on account of her health.1 He and his wife were, however, together in Rome on 13 February, when Sarah Bentham dined with them.2 According to Sir William Forbes, his business partner, Herries was a correspondent of Thomas Jenkins in Rome.3 See Catherine, Lady Herries.

Lord Hertford travelled with Dr John Colbatch, who had been his tutor since 1701. They were about to set out in July 1703,1 but appear not to have reached Italy until January 1706. Lord Hertford was in Venice on 29 January 1706 and by 12 February 1706 was intending to leave for Rome.2 He went via Ravenna and arrived in Rome by 12 March,3 but apparently within a month he was back in the Veneto (only 'Hartford' signing the University of Padua's visitors' book).4 'Il Conte Hartford' sent back to England 'due tavole di marmo' and some prints on 28 April 1706.5 At the end of the tour Hertford's father found fault with Colbatch and dismissed him (DNB).
A competent naval officer and a dedicated ladies man, Augustus Hervey's Journal describes his brief stays on the Italian mainland while he was serving with the Mediterranean fleet. He stayed principally at Leghorn, Genoa and Naples.1 At Leghorn his friends were the merchant John Birtles and the British consul Burrington Goldsworthy, with whom he visited Florence in June 1748. Horace Mann then gave him 'a conversationi in his gardens which he had illuminated in the manner of Vauxhall' (having been compelled to light the dark walks to avoid notoriety). In Genoa he was favoured by Mme de la Pietra Grimaldi, and in Naples by the Countess de Palena and the Princess of Francavilla, the Neapolitan carnival of 1753 being 'one continued round of dining, supping, dancing and -'. But his greatest affair was with Pellinetta Brignole-Sale whom he met in August 1754 in Genoa: 'here that intimacy began which lasted all the while I was in the Mediterranean, and which friendship can only finish with myself'. While most of his energies ashore were spent in the pursuit of pleasure, he did not entirely neglect Italian culture. He saw the collections in Florence; in 1753 he sketched the Temple of Baiae; he inspected the antiquities at Pompeii and Herculaneum, and in Naples he bought 'a great deal of the chinay of the King's manufactory ... 'tis bad chinay, but the painting and gilding is very fine'. It was also at Naples that he succeeded in smuggling out an Englishman, Mr Vernon, who was being detained on a charge of rape. Hervey held no high opinion of Italian society which allowed a 'great princess [to stroll] round the streets for amusement and in a continual conversation with her own footmen'; he noticed that the Neapolitan nobility 'hate the Spaniards abominable, and love the Germans and the English', but overall he held the Neapolitans in low esteem.
Lord Hervey was abroad for nearly three years, his father paying nearly £2000 for his expenses; John Mason ['Masson'] was his travelling tutor.1 'Lord Harvey's son' was in Turin with Lord Herbert (later 9th Earl of Pembroke), Charles Hotham and Michael Newton in October 1711.2 He was in Padua with Mason on 14 January,3 and arrived in Venice for the Carnival with Newton the following day.4 He was in Rome during the summer, William Kent remarking on 'Mr Harvey's' presence there on 25 June and 17 August 1712, on the second occasion with Lord Herbert.5
Christopher Hervey 'will not charm at first sight, but I never saw a man of better understanding, with the strictest notions of Honor and Morality, and, in my opinion, a peculiar sweetness of temper', wrote Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.1 Robert Adam had met Hervey in Rome in March 1755, describing him as a friend of Adam Ferguson with whom he had been in Leipzig, and 'a very good natured sensible young fellow'. Though he had no taste for drawing, he went with Adam to Tivoli, protesting 'that he would not be troublesome to us and that whilst I drew he would sit by me and read [Fielding's Tom Jones]'. Adam called on him again in Rome in January 1756,2 and he was conceivably the 'Monsu Hervey' living in Rome, 'seguita Ripetta verso il Porto' that year.3 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu had apparently met him in Venice in the spring of 1758, but, she wrote, 'our acquaintance was short, he being summon'd to England on the death of his Younger Brother'.1 In 1775 Sir William Hamilton proposed 'Mr Christopher Hervey, a Gentleman of landed estate in Kent which I believe he inherited on the death of Mr Bouverie', as chargé d'affaires during his absence on leave: 'he has lived several years abroad and is master of the French and Italian languages, but what is more essential, his conduct during a years residence in this City, has been such as to have already gained him an universal esteem'.4 'Harvey' was listed as chargé d'affaires from June 1776 to November 1777.5
Christopher Hervey was the author of Letters from Portugal, Spain, Italy and Germany, in the years 1759, 1760 and 1761 [1785]. Having travelled for over a year in Spain, Portugal and France, he arrived in Leghorn in August 1760. He described his journeys in a series of discursive letters which reflect no great interest in works of art, but an awareness of Italian literature with a particular concern for near-contemporary patriotic poets, such as Adami, Paolo Rolli and Vincenzo da Filicaia (Hervey offered a translation of his Italia, Italia, o tu). This was in part at least the consequence of the author's disapproval of Italian tyranny; Tuscany, for example, was ruled by foreign Princes who appeared to think 'more of plunder than of literature, and do not care to preserve a language they do not understand'.1 Hervey also offered less serious, but interesting observations. In Lucca (1 Sep. 1760), the only place where he considered the people reasonably free, he alleged that the church bells would strike 'four and twenty o'clock' half an hour after sunset (instead of the English midnight); in Rome (8 Jan. 1761) he saw a comedy in which an Englishman, My Lord Roast Beef, was portrayed as giving great presents and speaking very little. He left Naples for Rome on 24 March 1761, having renounced a scheme to visit Sicily and Malta.2
Felton Hervey went to Italy as a widower with his son (an officer) and daughter. They were in Florence by 10 September when they met his nephew, Colonel William Hervey. He sits in the foreground of Zoffany's Tribuna (Windsor), with Patch and Horace Mann standing behind him. Early in November 1772 Felton Hervey was presented to the Grand Duke1 and Lord Winchilsea had seen Zoffany's portrait of him in Florence in December.2 He was in Rome in April 1773 when Winchilsea commented that Hervey treated his daughter very ill, and described an audience with the Pope which he shared with Hervey and his son; Hervey, who was quite charmed with the Pope, being neither a peer nor an officer, had to lay aside his hat and sword in an outside room, but his son 'as an Officer only his hat'.3 He was possibly the Hervey listed in Florence on 23 October 1773.4
A fine handsome lad of 16 or 17, very like all the Herveys who are all as mad as March hares',1 he was in Florence in January 1786 with his father (then on his fourth visit).  He was conceivably the 'Mr Hervey' with Elizabeth, Lady Hervey, in Lausanne on 31 August 17922 and the Hervey with Captain Charles Greville in Naples at the end of November 1792, said to be returning to England 'immediately' with Capt. Charles Greville.3  He was certainly in Italy in 1793, when he went to tell his older brother John Augustus of his recall from Florence. He set out from England on 27 September 1793 and left Florence in December to return home.4 He may have been the 'Mr Hervis Inglese' in Venice on 29 December 1793.5
On his first visit to Italy in 1741, Lord Hervey was guided round Rome at the end of March by Mark Parker ('lent' by Lady Pomfret), and on 1 April he spent the evening in company which included Lady Pomfret, Lord Lincoln, Samuel Dashwood and George Pitt.1 In Florence he fell in with Horace Walpole, and late in April they travelled together2 through Bologna to Reggio.3 Horace Mann remembered that Lord Elcho had been a great favourite of 'little Lord Hervey when he was in Venice'.4 Hervey was ordered home by the end of May upon being made Captain in the 34th regiment of foot, and he arrived in England on 17 June.5  As Lord Bristol he was appointed envoy extraordinary at Turin, where he arrived on 15 June 1755.6 He was a very worthy nobleman, wrote William Cole, 'well versed in English History, antiquities, and heraldry', but he suffered from a 'most delicate and tender constitution, which made him desirous of going into warmer climates'.7 He left Turin on 14 or 15 August 1758,6 and sailed from Genoa with his brother Augustus on 20 August.8
Lord Hervey left England in the autumn of 1728 for the benefit of his poor health, which his father thought due to his addiction to 'that detestable and poisonous plant, tea'.1 With his friend Stephen Fox (1704-76), Hervey travelled first to Spa and then to Italy. He arrived in Rome early in December 1728, but soon discovered that the climate did not suit him, Stosch (who listed Fox as 'Lock') cynically reporting his complaint as hypochondria.2 Fox suffered a bad chest cold and they lived alone 'as if we were in the Desert of Libia' wrote Hervey to his mother. At the beginning of January 1729 they left for Naples3 where they spent a cold winter; he had never suffered more, he said, than during his three months habitation of this 'reputed Eden, the garden of the world'. Back in Rome in April the air now suited him better and he remained until June,4 sitting to the French sculptor Bouchardon for his bust (Ickworth; replica London art market 1969) and bidding unsuccessfully for four of a set of thirteen marble statues by Francavilla. Stephen Fox sat to Antonio David for a whole-length portrait (formerly at Redlynch) which is dated 1732, conceivably the date of completion.5 In July Hervey was in Florence where he wrote at length to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu deploring the religious and political state of modern Italy,6 and he composed a poem to his travelling companion ('The weary steps of mis'ry to attend, To share distress, and make a wretch thy friend'). He also underwent an operation on a tumour on his neck. They returned home via Pisa and Lerici, thence sailing to Genoa, where the British consul George Jackson was very civil towards them, and on to Turin. They were in Lyons on 11 October and arrived in England on 25 October 1729.
As a thirteen-year-old midshipman he accompanied his father on his second tour in 1770. At Aprica, near Bergamo, on 1 October 1771 the young Hervey got into a dispute with some shepherds whose dog was shot.1 The incident foreshadowed much of his subsequent career, for he grew up to be somewhat intemperate. He returned to Italy in 1785 with his wife and daughter (Elizabeth, d. 1803; m. 1798 Charles Rose Ellis), and stayed for some ten years. He met his sister, Lady Elizabeth Foster, in Paris and they all travelled together to Italy: in March 1785 they were in Lyons en route for Turin,2 and Lord Hervey and his sister arrived in Naples in May.3 Hervey attended his sister while she gave birth in secret to her illegitimate daughter by the Duke of Devonshire (see Lady Elizabeth Foster). On 3 December 1785 in Naples 'Lady H.' (somewhat ironically) confided to her sister-in-law how unhappy she was in her marriage, and she had to agree that her brother 'certainly neglects her very much'.4  Lord Hervey was living at Naples in July 1786,5 much involved with the Princess Roccafionta,6 and he was listed at Naples with Lady Hervey and Lady Erne, his elder sister, on 18 January 1787.7 He was becoming increasingly preoccupied with financial problems, frequently and unsuccessfully seeking help from his father. The situation was relieved in August 1787 when, perhaps through his father's influence, he was appointed British envoy to the Tuscan Court in Florence, in succession to Sir Horace Mann, and he arrived to take up his post on 13 February 1788.8  While Hervey had always lacked Mann's tact, there was nevertheless a gracious side to his character as witnessed by several travellers. In September 1787 Captain Sutherland received the 'greatest civilities' from him in Naples, and described Lady Hervey's 'gentleness and good sense';9 in Florence Elizabeth Gibbes considered that Lord Hervey did 'the honours of his court with great eclat',10 and Lady Malmesbury found him 'a pleasant man, odd, but civil and gentlemanlike'.11 But he was more generally disliked.12 By 1791 he was living openly with Lady Anne Hatton, but graver diplomatic inadequacies were displayed in 1792, when Austria declared war on France.13 Hervey then did all he could to incite Tuscany (traditionally neutral) to declare against the French (whom he hated). In 1793 he called the Grand Duke and his Minister a fool and a knave,14 and a further incident involving truculent behaviour led to his recall in September 1793 (though the Grand Duke was not officially informed of his dismissal until February 1794). 'It will not be possible to allow him to remain', wrote Lady Webster who, having heard him talk 'of going again into the navy', then found herself listening to a passionate declaration from him in February 1794.15  Hervey was granted a pension by the British government, but stayed in Italy, travelling from city to city. He was in Verona in late June on his way to Venice; in Bergamo on 3 September 1794,16 and in February 1795 in Florence where he became involved in a duel and was expelled in March. A miniature of him by Alexander Day is dated Rome 1795 (Ickworth). He rejoined the navy and died at Leghorn in January the following year, 'I believe', wrote Charles Grignion, 'aboard a ship'.17 Lady Hervey's movements, and those of their daughter, are not altogether clear. In the summer of 1786 she went with her sister-in-law, Lady Erne, from Leghorn to Genoa.18 She was in Rome by 6 December 178719 and in 1788 she was painted with her daughter at Rome by Angelica Kauffman (Ickworth). She was with her husband in Florence in November 1788,20 and was presumably the 'Miledi Arvy' who arrived in Venice on 20 May 1789.21 She was in Lausanne on 31 August 1792,22 en route for Italy with 'Mr Hervey' (presumably Frederick William) and Charles Greville (1762-1832), and she attended with her husband the wedding of Lord Bruce in Florence on 21 May 1793.23 In February 1794, when Hervey had been recalled, Brand wrote that Lady Hervey 'I think would conduct the business better than him for she is very clever'.24 'Miledi Arvi Inglese' with her daughter arrived in Verona from London on 26 October 1795 and left the following day for Venice; they left Venice on 6 December.25 See also Mary, Countess Erne.

Blessed with 'one of the happiest contented tempers', William Hervey loved 'reading and improvements of all kinds', and was 'a curious observer and an accurate relater'.1 On his first visit to Italy he spent a month in the Veneto as part of an extensive tour made in 1766. His laconic journal described Padua as 'a vile town', and the pictures in the Doge's Palace in Venice as 'mostly spoilt'; he met his brother the 4th Earl of Bristol and his wife in Venice on 27 September.2  On his second, longer, visit to Italy in 1772-3 his journal remains factual (and statistical). He followed one of James Byres's courses in Rome with Richard Neville, John Staples and Thomas Orde and there are long descriptive passages concerning the pictures in Florence, Rome and Naples.3 'Il Colonello Hervey' passed through Capua on 10 December 17724 and 'Col. Harvey' was mentioned by Lord Winchilsea in Rome on 17 April.5 In 1787 Carlo Labruzzi dedicated to him a series of engravings of figures suitable for insertion into landscape paintings.6  In 1788-90 he was again in Rome, where William Danby noted his presence in December 1788 and on 6 March 1789,7 and where Elizabeth Gibbes saw him in November 1789 and April 1790.8

Hesilrige's movements in Italy were observed by Stosch. He had arrived in Rome with a Mr Cave and Mr Pen [Daniel Pain] by 27 November 1723; on 4 March 1724 he left for Naples.1 A drawing by P.L. Ghezzi of Hesilrige, dated 6 April 1724 (Christ Church, Oxford), suggests he was then back in Rome. He left on 2 July, Stosch then reporting that his contacts with Jacobites were due to his youth, inexperience and wish to speak his own language.2 Rawlinson said Hesilrige was heading for Florence and Venice,3 and he was in Padua on 22 July with Daniel Pain Magister artium Univ: ox:s.4  It was later said that Hesilrige had 'passed a considerable time in Italy, particularly in Rome, whence he brought home many curious antiques'; there were several pictures at Noseley 'painted at Rome, in 1723, by Francisco Trevisani' (besides an unattributed portrait of Captain Daniel Pain of Welford, Northamptonshire), and a copy of Pietro da Cortona's Planetary Cycle from the Pitti Palace, set in the ceiling of the saloon at Noseley, is said to have been acquired in Italy by Sir Arthur.5


Sir Thomas and his wife (the cousin of the poet William Cowper) were in Turin in November 1769,1 and had arrived in Florence in March 1770, 'disposed to stay ... some time'.2 On 30 March Lady Hesketh and Lady Cowper gave a concert at which Thomas Linley performed on the violin.3 In December 1770 the Heskeths were in Naples.4 In September 1771 they were in Florence, where Sir Thomas was described by Patrick Home as a 'downright John Bull',5 and his wife also proved a little difficult. She complained that her countrymen neglected her, and James Byres suggested that 'her gaity outlives her youth'.6 In March 1772 it was said that the Grand Duchess had taken 'great notice' of her,7 but Norton Nicholls, writing from Florence on 7 April 1772, called her 'a coquette, though past the age when it becomes', and added 'Good heavens how she talks! It is a fashion among the English not to like her much'.8
Hesketh, Mark Davis, William Blackett and Richard Myddelton, with their tutors, took turns to give dinners at Rome 'in the quarter round the Piazza di Spagna'; they were staying at Margherita's (Blackett letters MSS; 29 Mar. 1785).

Robert Hewer was in Padua on 4 March 1730.1 'Hewer' was mentioned by Stosch amongst a group of Englishmen who had frequented Jacobite circles in Rome before leaving for England in October 1730.2

The Hewets were in Rome in December 1775 for only two days,1 and by May 1776 were in Florence. Horace Mann then described them as 'a remarkable couple, both of a certain age, which she endeavoured to conceal with rouge and the most fantastical dress, which he too liked. They seemed fond in company, but were always fighting when alone. He beat her in Boboli till a sentinel separated them'; later a servant broke into their room to find her 'on the floor in a dismal situation. He said they were acting a tragedy - which appeared true by the lady's black eye and bruises'.2
Hewetson spent thirty-three years based in Rome, where he died having achieved a considerable reputation as a sculptor, principally of portrait busts of the most eminent sitters. He was perceived at the time as the rival of Canova. The little that is recorded of his character suggests he was somewhat reserved by nature, but generous in his judgment. He had the support of Thomas Jenkins, then the most influential of British agents in Rome. Hewetson arrived in Rome in 1765 with Henry Benbridge, the young American painter.1 He subsequently lived in the Strada Vittoria, where he also had his studio.2 In September 1779 he was living 'opposite Margherita's',3 and in 1790 and 1793 in the Strada delle Orsoline (Rome List 1790, 1793). Only two excursions from Rome are recorded, both to Naples, in January 1766,4 and 1797. Within the first five years of his residence at Rome he had produced busts of the English antiquary Charles Townley (1769; BM), the Welsh Maecenas Sir Watkin Williams Wynn (1769; NGI) and the remarkable Irish prelate, Frederick Hervey, Bishop of Derry (c.1770; NPG). In terms of patronage, he could scarcely have received three more influential sitters and James Barry was soon complaining that Hewetson was one of the artists who had formed a conspiracy preventing him from obtaining commissions from Sir Watkin Williams Wynn.5 Then in 1771 came the commission from Trinity College, Dublin, for Hewetson's most substantial work, the memorial to Provost Baldwin, which occupied him over twelve years. Against a red granite 'pyramid' the expiring figure of the Provost is attended, as Hewetson explained, by an angel and 'a Muse, the Simbol of Science'.6 The monument was nearing completion in February 1781 when James Irvine wrote that Hewetson 'is doing a very clever monument for the late Provost of Dublin Collidge', and it was exhibited in Rome in July 1783, Irvine then considering that it had 'a great deal of merit'.7 Application to export the work from Italy was made on 22 August 1783,8 and it was erected in the Theatre of Trinity College in 1784. Meanwhile his portrait business had continued to flourish. It was probably through the influence of Thomas Jenkins, a particular favourite with the Pope, that he obtained sittings from Clement XIV in 1771, although Father Thorpe said it was 'by means of all powerful Abbé Grant'.9 Versions are dated 1771, 1772 and 1773 (Beningbrough Hall; Ammerdown Park; SNG; VAM). Among his other sitters in this decade were the Duke of Gloucester (1772; Windsor), the painter Mengs (1779, 1783; Bibliothèque Mazarine, Paris; Protomoteca Capitolina, Rome), and the Spanish ambassador Azara (1779; Bibliothèque Mazarine, Paris). Following the death in 1783 of Cardinal Giambattista Rezzonico (nephew of Pope Clement XIII) his brothers commissioned Hewetson to carve his monument (S.Nicola in Carcere, Rome). Henry Quin described it in Hewetson's studio in January 1786 as 'not a great Work, but two Cupids and a Bust',10 but contemporary criticism was kinder to this modest well-wrought monument. In 1784 Hewetson carved busts of the Grand Duchess Maria Fyodorovna of Russia (Gatchina palace 1914)10 and of Gavin Hamilton (Glasgow U.). The latter, or a version of it, was shown at the RA in 1786 and was later acquired by Sir William Hamilton. Hewetson's reputation then stood very high in Rome. In December 1785 Henry Quin observed that 'For the Honour of my Country I am glad to hear that the best sculptor at present in Rome is an Irishman, Hewson [sic], he that made Baldwin's Monument' but he added that 'there was nothing in his workshop to enable us to form a comparison between his and Canova's Talents'.11 Canova had arrived in Rome in 1779 and was at once a serious rival, whom Hewetson was graciously to acknowledge. They both competed for commissions for monuments to the Popes Clement XIV and Clement XIII, and Canova prevailed. In May 1787, Hewetson praised both Canova's designs and gave a great dinner in his honour which many artists attended. Such a generous response was hardly typical of the British artists then in Rome. In 1789/90 Hewetson completed a colossal marble bust of Leibniz (based on a portrait) which was then erected in Hanover (Leibniz Haus), and he executed a commemorative bust of his friend the gem engraver Johann Pichler (d. 1791) placed in the Pantheon in 1797 (and subsequently transferred to the Protomoteca Capitolina). But there are few known works from his last years. In 1791 he was writing to George Cumberland explaining that 'what business has been done this year has been divided between two parties [led apparently by Mrs Hare-Naylor and John Penn of Pennsylvania], whilst those who belong to neither have naturally enough been neglected. Your humble servant has the honour to be among the latter, and means to continue so'.12 Such stoicism apart, Hewetson had at the same time greatly enjoyed seeing Emma Hamilton perform her 'Attitudes' in Rome in April, being, according to James Irvine, 'all rapture when [Emma] is the theme. He says he is to attempt something from her on her return but swears he will show no mercy to his own work should he not succeed but will infallibly destroy it'.13 In August 1791 Hewetson had a brush with the Papal authorities, 'for unguarded expressions in the coffee house which had been exaggerated to the Secretary of State. However, he came off with flying colours', according to the Abbé Waters.14  In 1794 he made a bust of Prince Augustus (untraced) and in April that year he was one of the signatories of the letter of thanks addressed to the Prince by British artists at Rome (Rome List 1794). It was at this time that the sculptor John Deare was complaining in Rome against 'these thieves the antiquarians & the monopolizing artists', meaning Thomas Jenkins and Hewetson,15 whose working relationship evidently continued. In about 1796 Hewetson received another commission from the 4th Earl of Bristol (as the Bishop of Derry had become) for a statue of Pitt (Lord Chatham), which was never fully executed,16 probably due to the imminent French invasion of Rome. By 10 June 1797 Hewetson had gone to Naples, where he was undertaking busts of Sir William and Emma Hamilton; he was expected back in Rome in December. Hewetson died in Rome in 1798 'partly of age and partly through anxiety caused by the French ravages in Italy'.17 He was buried near the tomb of Caius Cestius and his will is preserved in the Archivio Capitolina in the Vallineliana at Rome. Jenkins and Deare also died that year, the former bequeathing a ring to Hewetson as a token of 'nostra costante amicizia'. Two portraits of Hewetson are known: a pencil drawing, inscribed 'Christopher Hewitson, Sculptor/HB Rome del.1769', by Henry Bunbury [or Henry Benbridge?] was formerly in a collection in Bury St Edmunds, and his portrait by Tofanelli in the Walraf-Richartz Museum, Cologne, shows him standing by his bust of Gavin Hamilton.
Thomas Hewett had travelled on the Continent for some five years, and had been recorded in Padua in 1688 (DBA). He has also been identified as the Hewet in Rome in 1717, first noticed by William Kent on 3 April; on 15 June Kent told Burrell Massingberd 'here is your friend Mr Hewet yt comes to see how it goes on, & will inform you how your power [poor] painter does when he comes home'. In March 1718 Kent sent to England three heads he had drawn for Hewett.1

Hewett first went to Italy as tutor to John, Marquess of Granby, and he subsequently spent much time there, known as 'Cavallo Bianco, from his always appearing mounted on a pale horse, like Death in the Revelation'.1 Smollett thought him 'one of the most original characters upon earth' and the only Englishman he had ever known who 'had resolution enough to live in his own way, in the midst of foreigners; for, neither in dress, diet, customs, or conversation, did he deviate one tittle from the manner in which he had been brought up'. He had been in Venice and Naples ('William Hewet' was listed at Capua on 14 December 1752 and 5 March 17542), whence he had made twelve identical circular tours-Marseilles, Antibes, Genoa, Florence, Rome. He returned to Italy in 1766 and died in Vannini's house in Florence on 27 May.
Possibly the Henry Hewett ('Henry Hewett of Venice') listed at Padua between 1714 and 1716 (Brown 1453, 1469, 1502).
They were in Naples sometime between December and March 1792/3.1 In Rome on 1 April 1793 they met Sir William Forbes, to whom Heyland later recounted how Flaxman had received 'journeyman's wages' for his Fury of Athamas made for the 4th Earl of Bristol (a 'particular acquaintance' of Heyland's).2 By 12 April they were in Florence, where Mrs Heyland was lying in on 7 May.3
Major Heywood accompanied the Duke of Gloucester to Italy on his first two visits, in 1771-2 and 1775-7. On the second visit at least Mrs Heywood, who was a woman of the Bedchamber to the Duchess, accompanied him; four of his letters to Sir Charles Hotham Thompson from this tour convey a certain spirit (Hotham letters MSS). From Venice (12 Oct. 1775) Heywood wrote 'When you see a letter from me I make no doubt you will say ... Here is a Boar for an Hour, About Busts, Statues, Bas Relievos, old Rusty Farthings, & all the Venetian Schoole of Painters', but, he said 'I would rather see one pritty Lively girl, than all the Collections of Venice put together'. His wife's important role was indicated by Horace Mann who wrote in September 1777, when the Duke was particularly ill, that the Duchess was so distressed that 'she did not write a syllable, nor even saw Mrs Heywood' (Wal.Corr., 24:323).


Possibly also the 'Mr Hibert con suo fratello Inglesi' at Venice on 15 November 1792 (ASV is 766)
Mr and Mrs Hibbert were in Naples on 18 January 1787,1 and arrived in Venice on 9 May ('Hibbet, Mons., moglie e una figlia').2
Thomas Hickey was in Rome by April 1762. 'There is a young gentleman arrived here one Mr Hickey', wrote George Dance, 'a painter who brought us Letters of Recommendation from Cap.n Smith and Brother Bill - He is a very agreeable young man we make much of him you may [be] sure on account of his recommendation'.1 In 1765, listed as 'Tomas Hichi Ibernese pittore Eretico 24', he was living in the Strada Felice, in the same house as James Alves, Solomon Delane and Laurent Pêcheux.2 Little is known of his stay in Rome or of the crayon portraits that he may have produced there, but on 5 May 1765 'Mon.u Hickey' and 'Mon.u Chauvet' were in Capua, returning from Naples to Rome, their passports authorised by Tanucci in Naples on 3 May.3 On his return to Dublin, Faulkner's Journal announced on 16 May 1767 that 'Mr Thomas Hickey arrived from Italy from the pursuit of his studies in the art of painting'. He subsequently travelled widely, twice to India and to China, where he went as official portrait painter in the embassy with Lord Macartney.



His portrait was drawn by Rosalba Carriera in 1735/6 (priv. coll.)1 and he was in Rome with a tutor in December 1736.2
Hildyard was in Turin on 13 November 1765 and subsequently spent some eighteen months in Rome, during which he paid occasional visits to Florence and Naples.1 His annotated copy of Cochin's Voyage d'Italie belonged to family descendants in 1963. He sat to Batoni in Rome in 1766 (Clark/Bowron 301; priv. coll.). He was in Venice early in June 1767, and had apparently kept a 'Flame at Florence'.2 'Sir Robert Hildyard' was in Naples in March 1796, when J.B.S. Morritt found his company uncongenial.3


Brian Hill was the author of Observations and remarks in a journey through Sicily and Calabria, in the year 1791: with a postscript, containing some account of the ceremonies of the last Holy Week at Rome, and of a short excursion to Tivoli [1792]. He had travelled with his half-brother, Sir Richard Hill and a nephew (John Hill), and they had arrived in Venice on 24 November 1790 ('Huill Bart Inglese Mons Bon Huill Inglese Mons Iolin Huill Inglese').1 They sailed to Palermo from Naples on 1 February 1791 and stayed in Sicily for nearly seven weeks; returning across the Messina Straits to Reggio, they were back in Naples 22 March. The following month they were in Rome for Holy Week.
Hill was travelling with the British diplomat Francis Drake from Milan to Verona in May 1796.1 On 19 May he was listed in Padua as having come from Vicenza, intending to stay some time.2 Three of his letters from Venice in November and December 1796 are Add.41199, ff.47, 49, 51.


Richard Hill was appointed envoy extraordinary to Savoy-Sardinia a second time in 1704 (the first occasion being in 1699). In September 1703, a month after he had received his official instructions in London, he inadvertently divulged to the French the secret negotiations then proceeding between Savoy and Austria, which resulted in Savoy deserting the French. He arrived in Turin on 14 January 1704 and left for Genoa on 8 December 1705, having been in residence during the relief of the city by Austrian forces under Prince Eugene. Hill was absent in Nice between May and June 1704 when John Chetwynd, his secretary, deputised.1 His Diplomatic Correspondence was published in 1845 (ed. W. Blackey).

Samuel Hill is said to have travelled on the Continent between c.1709-1715. He was probably the 'Mr Hill, of the Admiraltie's nephew', 'a very pretty gentleman' who came from Naples to Rome in February 1712 and who lent a house in Naples (which he 'had taken for some time') to Charles Baldwyn.1 He was certainly in Padua on 4 April 17122 and was presumably the Mr Hill in Venice by 18 March.3  Hill was again in Italy in 1728-9 when he bought and commissioned a number of (principally Venetian) pictures, and set up the apprenticeship of his nephew Samuel Egerton with Joseph Smith in Venice.4 He was in Rome in 1728 sometime before August (when his sister had received a letter from him there) and he was then in Leghorn, where he intended to try and fix his nephew with a merchant. He was probably the Hill listed in Rome on 18 November 1728,5 and on 23 January 1729 he was in Padua ('per l'ultima volta').6 On 26 November 1729 Joseph Smith in Venice wrote to him at Paris listing those items which Hill had bought and were then being shipped to London; they included '6 Peices of Piazzetta', '1 Rosalba', 'Holy Family by Tizian', 'Peice of old Roman Painting a fresco' and '2 peices Marco Ricci'; Smith also said he had paid 'Magnoni of Bologna' for '2 copys' made for Hill.  Back at Shenstone Park in July 1730 Hill received another letter from Smith saying that 'At last I've got Canal under articles to finish your 2 peices within a twelvemonth'; on 15 December 1730 Samuel Egerton in Venice told his uncle that the two pictures by Canal 'you order'd when you was last here' should shortly be ready.



Hillary was an equerry to Prince Augustus, with whom he was in Italy in 1796-7. William Artaud described him as 'a gentleman from Liverpool' and painted his portrait in Rome in the summer of 1796; Artaud was introduced by him to Augustus in Naples the following year and he acted as agent for Hillary in commissioning works from the landscape painters Kaisermann and 'Milner'.1 In May 1797 Hillary, with Brummell, complained to Sir William Hamilton that his servants had been sent away in Naples,2 though that was part of an evacuation scheme in face of a French invasion.
The Earl of Hillsborough, 'a well-bred, handsome man with agreeable manners, more fitted to the part of courtier than a statesman', arrived at Naples from Marseilles with his first wife at the beginning of December 1765.1 'Poor Lady Hillsborough', wrote William Hamilton to Horace Mann on 24 December, 'that arrived here about 3 weeks ago, grows weaker every day, and will not, I fear, live many weeks'.2 She died on 25 January 1766, and her husband left Naples about six weeks later.3 Later that year Lord Kildare and Charles Fox found Hillsborough's Italian master in Naples to be 'dreadfully stupid'.4 In March or April 1766 Hillsborough had sat to Batoni in Rome. The signed and dated whole-length portrait (Clark/Bowron 300; on loan to the Ulster Museum, Belfast) shows the Earl contemplating an oval portrait of his wife, his head cast down in grief. The Earl arrived in Florence at the end of April and had returned to England by the beginning of August.5
Aged sixteen and already married, Lord Hinchingbrooke travelled in Italy with a governor, Lacome. He was in Padua on 29 February 1708,1 and at Venice for the end of the Carnival, when Lord Manchester reported on their progress. There had been 'differences' between Hinchingbroke and Lacome, but Manchester had persuaded them to go on to Rome, although he doubted whether 'anything is to be learnt for one of his age there, there being no academy', and he further doubted Lacome's capability of prevailing 'with him to have that application he ought'; Lord Hinchingbrooke had 'so much life and spirits, and is so young, that it is not to be expecting great application in matters which do at first require some pains'; they were to leave for Rome on 3 March, and then go on to Naples.2
Mr Hinchliffe (son of the Bp. of Peterborough)' was seen in Florence in November 1788,1 and in Rome on 21 January 1789.2 He arrived in Venice on 19 April.3 His portrait by H.D. Hamilton dated 1789 is at Nottingham AG. He was possibly the 'Giovanni Hinchley Inglese' who was in Venice from 27 December 1792 to 8 January 1793.4
According to James Adam, Hinchliffe was 'a shrewd sensible man and one who is very profoundly knowing in a great many things'.1 He was in Italy as tutor to John Crewe and he described much of his journey in neatly written, unctuous letters addressed to his friend Mrs Walsingham, with one to his future patron the 3rd Duke of Grafton.2 In general Hinchliffe thought Italy was both corrupted and corrupting. 'If States like men have their different ages ... this of Italy surely is near its grave', he wrote (to Grafton, 5 May 1762). 'If licentiousness is the same thing as liberty, no nation upon earth enjoy an equal freedom with the Venetians' he supposed (8 Dec. 1761), and in Rome he deplored the dirt and the deserted aspect of the surrounding countryside (31 Mar. 1762).  But there were better moments, as when he first came to Rome: 'Never Pilgrim approached the tomb of Mahomet with an imagination more warmed, than I did yesterday the antient capitol of the world' (8 Dec. 1761). He commented favourably on the 'peace, decency and order' of the modern city, studied the antiquities and enjoyed the company of the Dukes of Grafton and Roxburghe, the Duchesses of Grafton and Bridgewater, Lord Tavistock and Sir Richard Lyttelton (31 Mar. 1762). He studied the orders of architecture under George Dance,3 and was particularly interested in painting, the one art in which the moderns excelled the ancients, and practised himself; 'I have got into oyl colours', he told Mrs Walsingham on 23 December 1761, '& handle the brush at present in imitation of Claude Lorrain'. In Florence, he witnessed a fire in the Uffizi [12 August 1762] and experienced a violent storm during which all the church bells were rung as they were supposed to 'to have some charm against lightning'; he otherwise 'employed most of the summer [of 1762 in Florence] in reading the Italian historians' (31 Aug. 1762). Hinchliffe's grandson later alleged that his grandfather had met Canaletto in Venice. Seeing 'a little man making a sketch of the Campanile', Hinchliffe approached to discover 'a master-hand and hazarded the artist's name, 'Canaletti'. The man looked up and replied, 'mi conosce'. Thereupon a conversation ensued' and Canaletto invited Hinchliffe to his studio the following day; having asked if he might purchase 'the painting about to be made from the sketch he had seen the artist take, Canaletti not only agreed to this, but, in addition, presented him with the sketch itself, as a complimentary gift'.4 Towards the end of his Italian journey Hinchliffe confided to Mrs Walsingham 'I cannot see what has induced the generality of travellers to extol this country ... for my part I am satisfied that the dangers of travelling far exceed the boasted advantages ... & a young man must have an extraordinary share of prudence to return home with as few vices & follies as he set out' (31 Aug. 1762).

Lord Hinton and his brother, presumably his twin brother Peregrine Poulett, both Jacobites, arrived in Rome towards the end of March 1729,1 with one 'D. Nicholson', whom Stosch considered suspicious (and who left in August).2 The brothers travelled to Naples in October,3 and were apparently back in Rome late in December when Stosch said he broke the windows of the house 'd'une femme de mauvaise vie' and left Rome with his brother, 'après y avoir mené une vie qui Lui a fait guerre d'honneur en touts égards'.4 They were in Venice the following March, waiting for the opening of the opera at Piacenza.5
An ambitious and busy man, not above intrigue, Hippisley first went to Italy in 1779. At Easter 1779 he was staying by the Strada Frattina in Rome, engaged 'in confidential communication with the English government', doubtless involving official relations with the Papacy, but he also spent time with British artists and occasionally acted as a cicerone.1 Thomas Jones met him in Rome on several occasions between July 1779 and February 1780.2 Tresham was painting his portrait in September 1779, 'sitting on the Capitol of a Column, a Book in one hand and a Map of antient Rome in the other. The back Ground consists of a Roman view, the Colosseo &c.'; Giuseppe Plura modelled his bust which was being cast on 24 September 1779,3 and in March 1780 Pars drew the tomb of the Horatii at Albani which he was 'to introduce in the background of a whole length Picture he is painting of Mr Hippisley'.4 The Pars portrait is in a private collection, but the other two portraits remain untraced. Hippisley was also acquainted with the antiquary James Clark and the banker Tierney in Naples, where he had been with Lord Maynard sometime before July 1780.5  When young Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) returned to Rome from Naples in September 1779, he was guided by Hippisley, who had 'been in Rome some time'. Herbert wrote that 'Mr Hippisly whom I had known in England lodged in the same House I did [Margherita's], and was so good as to be my Cicerone during my whole stay, and was so excellent a one, that I flatter myself of having seen Rome more completely and to greater advantage, than most of my young Countrymen, who in fact, do not see it, although they stay often more months than I did weeks'.6 Hippisley, with another George Herbert and Robert Jarrett (who were returning home from India), rejoined Lord Herbert in Pisa and Leghorn between 24 and 28 November, and was in Florence in December 1779, before returning again alone to Rome via Perugia.7 He had advised Lord Herbert on what best to see in Florence (mentioning Guercino, Correggio and John of Bologna), Cortona and Perugia (which 'pleased me greatly'), and later acted as Herbert's agent in handling the intaglio commissioned from Marchant for his mother, Lady Pembroke.8 His attention to Lord Herbert, and the fact that in May 1780 he gave Thomas Jones a letter of introduction to Sir William Hamilton at Naples, indicate Hippisley enjoyed a certain status. Earlier that year he had married, an event which he had rather cautiously described to Lord Herbert on 7 March: 'the Lady is no other than Miss M. Stewart. She whom you don't think the best Humoured, for it is not the red-haired one'; she brought him £3000, which would be useful in India where Hippisley was resolved to go next.9 He is last recorded in Rome on 3 June 1780.10 Between 1782 and 1787 he made his fortune in India and he became an MP in 1790.  In 1792 a bronchial complaint led him to set out again for Rome with his first wife, his small son Wyndham, and Lilias Stewart (probably Elizabeth, his wife's sister). They hired a boat at Falmouth to sail direct to Italy, but a storm drove them back and they travelled overland through France.11 In December he attended the trial of Louis XVI in Paris. Mrs Hippisley told her other sister in Rome (the Countess Cicciaporci) that half the National Assembly then attended her morning toilet.13 They sailed from Marseilles via Genoa to Leghorn and travelled overland through Pisa and Siena to Rome which they reached on 6 March 1793. On 17 April Sir William Forbes attended a family gathering in Rome with the Hippisleys, the Cicciaporcis and 'Miss Stuart' [presumably Lilias].14 Although the party remained centred at Rome, they visited Loreto and Ancona in July 1794 and made at least one visit to Naples. In Rome Hippisley became the admirer and confidant of Pius VI and, although a Protestant, he was an advocate of the Catholic interest both at home and abroad. With his privileged but unofficial position, he helped negotiate the provisioning of the British Mediterranean fleet in 1793-4, and he assisted French royalist refugees from Toulon. He was made an honorary citizen of San Marino, and he presented a number of British travellers to the Pope. At the end of his visit Hippisley received a letter from the Pope, dated 26 April 1795, thanking him for his services and saying that 'the union of the Emblems of Rome to the Arms of his Family as they are represented by the annexed model, can be but very precious to us'; the letter was annotated by Hippisley: 'no instance of a similar concession ever occurred in favour of a Protestant'. Hippisley's portrait by Guy Head (priv. coll.), shows him holding a document inscribed concordiae perpetuae, the motto given in the Papal letter.15 Evidence of Hippisley's diplomatic activity is principally preserved in two manuscript volumes of his Roman correspondence (priv. coll.), being mostly letters he received (his correspondents including Popes Pius VI and VII, Cardinal York and the Countess of Albany).16 Hippisley was not universally liked; 'the great politician, Hippisley, still remains here and is a great talker', wrote Lady Knight somewhat sarcastically from Rome in August 1793.17 His diplomacy had always been unofficial, but he had strenuously sought official recognition and a baronetcy. Hippisley had remained MP for Sudbury while he was in Rome, and claimed to his constituents that he had distributed samples of Sudbury wool in Italy. He and his party left Rome on 24 May 1795 and returned to England through Florence, Venice and the Tyrol. In London he was described as 'an intriguer by nature educated in St James Street, polished in Italy, practised for years in the East Indies and finished in Rome'.18 In April 1796 he was finally made a Baronet for his part in negotiating the marriage between the Princess Royal and the Duke of Wurtemberg. He was subsequently instrumental in having the government pension for the aging Cardinal York increased; when the Cardinal died in 1807 he bequeathed to Hippisley a number of Stuart portraits and relics which remain in a private collection. In 1813 Hippisley negotiated the final sale of the eighteenth-century Stuart papers (bequeathed by the Duchess of Albany to the Abbé Waters, who d. 1806) to the Royal Library at Windsor.19 Hippisley paid his last visit to Rome in 1818.

Henry Hoare was apparently abroad from December 1738 to September 1741.1 His grandson, Richard Colt Hoare, later commented that 'he went abroad, and the study of the fine arts occupied that attention in Italy which the pursuit of a fox had done in England'. Henry Hoare spent some £3,750 through agents in 1739 and 1740, items including 'figures etc. from Leghorn' and '2 cases of pictures from Mr [Joseph] Smith of Venice'.2 His most celebrated acquisitions from Italy came later: Horace Mann purchased for him Maratti's Pallavicini conducted to the Temple of Fame in 1758 and Thomas Jenkins commissioned from Mengs on his behalf the Caesar and Cleopatra completed in 1760 (both at Stourhead).3
Henry Hoare travelled with his tutor John Rust, a relation by marriage and a lively companion. They were in Aix in December 1750, but by March 1752 Hoare had died in Naples. Rust was at first charged with neglect, but he received an annuity of £400 from Sir Richard Hoare on his return (K. Woodbridge, Landscape and Antiquity, 36-7).

A tall handsom agreeable person', he returned to England in January 1750 having studied in Italy 'about seven or eight years'.1 By January 1749 he had made 'an admirable copy' of an Antinous relief belonging to Cardinal Albani, who thought him very clever and anxious to succeed.2 From Florence in August 1749 he thanked Albani for his introduction to Horace Mann and said he was thinking of leaving for England in 10 or 12 days but, since he was hoping to return to Italy in 6 or 7 months, he was leaving many of his principal works behind in Florence.3 Mann thought him 'very clever in copying, but I have seen nothing original of his doing'; Hoare had copied a bust of Cicero from the Uffizi and was making a marble copy of Ganymede for Lewis Monson Watson.4 He was elected to the Florentine Academy on 3 September 1749,5 and returned home via Marseilles with Mann's servant, Giberne.4
B.R. Haydon was to describe Prince Hoare as the son of 'a bad painter at Bath, who, having as high opinion of Prince's genius, sent him with a valet to Italy to get what nature had denied him, in the Capella Sistina. He went through the whole routine of labouring for natural talents by copying Michael Angelo, copying Raffaele, copying Titian; came home to be the rival of Reynolds, [but] found his own talents in art were of the feeblest order'.1 Hoare was copying in the Uffizi in November 1776,2 but by 23 November 1776 he had arrived in Rome,3 where he was said to have studied under Mengs. Thomas Jones met him on 18 May 1777 with Hewetson in Thomas Jenkins's villa at Castel Gandolfo,4 and he was staying in the Strada Felice in 1778 and 1779.5 He met Fuseli and was friendly with Ozias Humphry (although they were rivals for the affection of Maria Hadfield),6 but his principal companion in Italy was James Northcote, who described him as 'a very genteel young man' who studied painting 'though he has an independent fortune of two or three hundred a year. I went to him because Sir Joshua advised me to cultivate acquaintance with him sooner than with any other Sir Joshua knew in Rome'.7  A sketch-book by Hoare (VAM) contains drawings after antique sculpture in the manner of Fuseli, but of his paintings there are only the two self-portraits in the Uffizi, and Father Thorpe's comment of October 1777 that he had seen some 'cleverly painted heads' by him.8 Hoare paid a brief visit to Naples in April 1779 with a party which included Northcote, Maria Hadfield, Thomas Banks and Henry Tresham. In June he left Rome for England with Northcote; they spent three months in Florence where Hoare was again copying in the Uffizi,9 and two in Parma, before wintering in Venice (where he painted one of his self-portraits in the Uffizi). After his return to England Hoare was elected to the Florentine Academy on 22 April 1781.10

Richard Colt Hoare inherited Stourhead from his grandfather, the famous banker Henry Hoare, and lived accordingly in easy circumstances. He made two visits to Italy, subsequently explaining that it was 'a love for drawing and literature' that first attracted him to 'this once happy and enlightened country; and a desire of examining the less-frequented and most picturesque provinces, obliged me to search for more detailed and satisfactory information than could be found in the usual track of modern tour-writers'. He wrote of his experiences in his Recollections Abroad 1785-91 [1815-18], whose text closely reflects his antiquarian and topographical interests. His MS accounts of his travels are preserved by the Wiltshire Archaeological Society (Journal of a tour in Italy 1785-7) and the Cardiff City Library (journals covering all his travels).1 Following the death of his wife in August 1785 (only two years after their marriage), Hoare sought solace abroad, embarking on a two-year tour with Captain William Merrick in September. Travelling overland through France, they arrived in Turin on 15 October. His first sight of Rome was disappointing: 'I saw only the same appearances as in other Italian towns'; his romantic ideas vanished, and the 'the Scipios and Caesars were transferred into abbes and cardinals, and the marble palaces and triumphal cars into hotels and hackney-coaches'. His companion Merrick died of malaria at Naples on 18 November, soon after their arrival-'the only unfortunate victim'-but Hoare stayed on until February 1786 when he returned to Rome with 'my friend' Dr John Warner. In Rome he devoted four hours each day for five weeks to visiting antiquities under the guidance of Colin Morison (who was to act as his agent sending pictures and books back to Stourhead). He visited Thomas Jenkins, who had been his grandfather's friend and agent, and was presented to the Duchess of Albany, 'a very pleasant woman and rather handsome'. The artist Samuel Woodforde (whom he and his father had both patronised) accompanied him on an excursion to Tivoli at the end of April. He left Rome on 17 May, travelling via Bologna and Parma to Genoa, whence he sailed for Marseilles on 3 June 1786.  For the next five months he travelled in France and Spain. He returned to Italy in November, sailing from Antibes to Savona, thence to Genoa and on to Florence where he arrived on 6 December 1786. In the Palazzo Zambeccari in Florence he remarked on two paintings, a St John on paper by Titian and a shepherd boy with a lamb by Guercino, which by 1791 he had acquired for Stourhead. At Siena he observed that 'for the young and inexperienced traveller, who wishes to make himself master of the Italian language, and to enjoy the society of the natives, no situation more eligible can be chosen'. Later in Venice, where he was guided by Giuseppe Maria Sasso, he admired the Veronese ceiling in S. Nicoletto dei Frari, the oil sketch for which he later bought in Rome from Morison. He also accidentally discovered and acquired ten of Canaletto's twelve drawings for the solennita Dogali 'carelessly displayed in the portfolio of a bookseller'. He left Turin on 31 May 1787 and arrived in Dover on 13 July. Travel in Italy, according to Father Thorpe, put Hoare 'out of conceit' with the pictures he had at home,2 and the improvement of his collection must have been one of the motives which prompted him to set out again for the Continent in June 1788. But Colt Hoare explained that his second Italian tour was undertaken when he had 'gained a sufficient knowledge of Italian to enable me to interrogate without the need of an interpreter,' so that he could leave 'the road for the path, the capitals for the provinces;' it was 'somewhat singular, that the interior of Italy should remain so little known, and so little frequented.'[Classical Tour through Italy and Sicily [1819], 1:xi]. He went through Germany and entered Italy through Trieste in October. He visited the ruins at Pola (which he noted had been drawn the previous year 'by Mr [Thomas] Harrison, an English architect'; but see Harrison) before going to Venice. He spent the winter between Florence and Siena, until 'the approach of spring, which in Italy is the most delightful season of the year, roused me from the abodes of ease and dissipation, and summoned me to the field in search of new scenery and new information'. He resolved to explore the ancient Etrurian country and went through Volterra (where he stayed with his friend Marcello Ighirami) Pomerance and Suvareto to the coast; he spent a week on the isle of Elba and then returned to Siena through Grosseto, Orbetello, Cosa and Rusellae. He reflected how rich soil and good ports were spoiled by the badness of the air which permitted only a poor and imprudent population, 'who expose themselves too early in the morning and too late at night'.  He finally left Tuscany in October and, with Signor Armano of Bologna, reached Rome via Perugia on 22 October. The whole road was now 'most practicable', due to 'the perseverance and great exertions' of the Pope. After a week he set out to explore the Appian Way, accompanied by Carlo Labruzzi, but bad weather and the artist's poor health curtailed their scheme at Minturno, long before they reached Brindisi. Labruzzi returned to Rome soon after they reached Terracina,3 and Hoare retired to Naples, but in the end he owned 226 of the careful sepia drawings Labruzzi made from his water-colours taken on the spot (some now BMPL and Accademia di S.Luca, Rome).4  The following spring [1790] Hoare went to Sicily where he remained from March until the autumn. When he returned to Naples he made two excursions with Philipp and Georg Hackert, 'one a celebrated landscape painter, the other a no less eminent engraver', to Venafro and Isernia in September, and to Caiazzo and Piedimonte in October (also with John Graefer). He finally left Naples on 28 October and returned to Rome along the Via Latina. From Rome the following year he visited the Lake of Celano (the Fucine Lake) in May before setting off home. He spent a few weeks with friends in Siena and with Paulo Bucci in his country house at Armajuolo, and then proceeded rapidly north. 'It was not without a considerable degree of regret that I bade adieu to Italy', he wrote; 'friendship and gratitude had endeared the natives to me; the mine of classic and antiquarian information, as well as picturesque beauty, was yet unexhausted' [Recollections Abroad 1790-1, [1818], 191]. He returned to England through Germany with the artist Samuel Woodforde whom he had first met at Rome in 1786. Hoare listed 604 drawings he had made on his travels, the majority of which are preserved in albums at Stourhead (but 83 of his Italian drawings are now in the VAM, and 84 in the YCBA). He had been taught by John 'Warwick' Smith but, while he had a bold sense of design and a keen eye for the dramatic possibilities of landscape, his execution tended to the mechanical. He acquired many landscapes in Italy, from Carlo Labruzzi, 'Don Tito' Lusieri, Philipp Hackert and Louis Ducros, to the extent that he was criticised within the artists' colony in Rome for only employing artists 'in the branch he is fondest of, Landskip, instead of Sculpture &c.'5 He particularly admired Ducros, whose elaborate watercolours aspired to the substance of oil paintings. Labruzzi dedicated to him a set of 13 plates, Figure Originali, in 1788, and in 1794 published his Via Appia Illustrata, engravings from his drawings made for Hoare. Hoare acquired a number of old masters in Italy, such as the Cigoli Adoration from the Alvizzi chapel in S.Pietro Maggiore, Florence, and a Madonna attributed to del Sarto, both bought in Florence in 1790; Guercino's La Madonna degli Figli was bought in Bologna. Hoare also collected 'a series of studies from the works of the most distinguished foreign artists', employing a number of artists to take copies in bistre, principally C.J. Seydelmann and John Rouby.
A young man who had studied drawing some time, had a strong genius, a sober young man', he went to Italy with his master Grisoni in 1728.1 In 1729 and 1730 Hoare was living in Rome in the Via Gregoriana with the painter Pieter Angellis and the sculptors Laurent Delvaux and Pieter Scheemakers, and in 1731 and 1732 with Delvaux alone.2 Late in 1730 he was in Genoa, where Charles Hanbury Williams gave Hoare an introduction, dated 23 November 1730, to Francis Colman at Florence ('the gentleman that brings you this ... coms to study there'). Hoare subsequently painted Colman's portrait.3 Little is known of Hoare's activity in Italy,4 but he studied under Imperiali in Rome (at the same time as Batoni) and evidently visited Venice; he returned to England in about 1738.1
George Hobart was in Turin early in 1768 in pursuit of the opera singer Zamperini who became, or was already, his mistress.1 He was in Florence on 12 March,2 and was going on to Rome, where on 19 March Cardinal Albani acknowledged Horace Mann's letter of introduction.3
In June 1745 Horace Walpole gave Hobart a letter of introduction to Horace Mann in Florence, and he left Harwich for the Continent in July.1 He reached Florence in May 1746 and stayed in Lady Orford's empty house; Mann found him 'so unlike all the English that I adore him'.2 He was proposed for the Society of Dilettanti in November 1746 by Sir James Gray, the British resident in Venice.3 In June 1747 he was 'still' in Naples, proposing to be back in Florence by the end of the month; but his resolution, wrote Mann, 'does not, I believe, depend upon him, but on somebody there with whom he is very smitten'.4 Though he ought 'long since to have obeyed his father's summons to return home' (for the elections then taking place), he had only arrived in Florence on 11 July, having been 'unwilling to leave his loves at Rome'; he stayed a week with Mann and left on 22 July.5  In 1776 Mann wrote to him from Florence concerning 'the lady who so long attracted your attention here'; she was then a widow, in perfect health.6



With his servant Rotondi, Hobhouse set out from England in October 1783 for the south of France. His health had been poor and after spending some time there he sailed from Marseilles for Leghorn on 13 September. He reached Rome by 1 October, having come through Lucca, Pisa, Florence and Siena. In his Remarks on Several Parts of France, Italy &c. in the years 1783, 1784, and 1785 [1796] he devoted nine letters to Rome which he found quiet, the theatres shut and the only public amusement 'a combat between men and buffaloes in the amphitheatre'. By 21 December he was in Naples. With a Polish Count, who had 'a great deal of fierceness in his countenance', he ascended Vesuvius by night and made an excursion to Paestum. He was presented to the King of Naples by Sir William Hamilton and joined a Royal hunt (which he considered poor sport). After witnessing 'the follies of the people at the close of the carnival' he left Naples for Rome by vettura. From Rome he travelled post to Bologna, via Loreto, Terni, Spoleto and Ancona. In his list of pictures in Bologna he noted that Guido Reni's Peter remonstrating with Paul was 'not only esteemed the chef d'oeuvre of that eminent master, but the most complete picture in Italy'. At this point in his series of letters, Hobhouse explained that his pen 'which had for a long time been unable to keep pace with me, now abandoned the regular pursuit'. He did not describe his visits to Venice and Turin in March. He was back in England in September 1785, the month of his first marriage.



By March 1793 Hodges had instituted rouge et noir tables in Naples,1 where he pestered Emma Hamilton with his attentions.2 He was perhaps the Hodges who in June 1793 travelled with Lady Webster from Rome to Florence, 'a good-tempered, gentleman-like man, and full of readiness to do any little services'.3 In November 1793 he was setting up in Rome; 'he has taken a house and set up a carriage', wrote Thomas Brand, 'and has been furnished with letters of credit from Lord Cholmondeley and Sir Godfrey Webster for 500 li each to which he adds 500 li of his own and opens a rouge et noir table'.4 He was probably the Thomas Hodges recorded in Bergamo in October and again in November 1794,5 when he went on to Venice (19 December-9 January).6 In June 1795 Hodges was again in Lady Webster's party in Lucca and he then travelled with her from Leghorn to Genoa.





William Holbech was in Florence late in 1732 or early in 1733 when Joseph Spence met him,1 and he was in Rome on 12 November 1733 dining with Martin Folkes.2 In Rome on 2 March 1734 Richard Pococke was asked by 'ye younger Mr Holdbech' to dine, which he duly did on 4 March with 'ye 2 Mr Holdbechs',3 William having been joined apparently by his brother Hugh. 'Two Brothers, whose names are Holbetch' were in Venice by the end of April and on their way home.4 William Holbech is thought to have acquired two Canalettos in Venice.5

Messrs Holder & Jermy signed a memorial in Leghorn on March 1743; Simon Holder, merchant, died in Leghorn on 20 March 1754 (ASF SE 2300. Leghorn Inscr., 39)


Holderness arrived in Venice as British ambassador extraordinary on 17 October 17441 and immediately, but unsuccessfully, requested to be ambassador at Turin.2 Since 1736 (on the death of Elizeus Burges) there had been no British resident in Venice, following the Republic's reception of the Young Pretender; Joseph Smith had been appointed consul in June 1744 and Holderness's arrival marked the resumption of full diplomatic relations. In February 1745 he gave 'a magnificent entertainment' in honour of the Society of Dilettanti, and his membership of the Society was proposed in April that year.3  In May Mann reported that Holderness had 'laid down his public character, but still stays at Venice; my Lady will lay in there'. A son George was born in September 1745 (he was to die of smallpox in September 1747). Holderness's last official dispatch was dated 13 May 1746, and he left Venice on 23 August 1746, his secretary, Sir James Gray, staying on as British resident. A View of the Thames by Antonio Joli (Christie's, New York, 16 Jan. 1992) includes a sailing vessel some of whose cargo is inscribed 'Milord Oldenes/Venis'.
After resigning from Magdalen College, Oxford, as a non-juror, Holdsworth became a travelling tutor. In 1719 he was mistaken for William Oldisworth, editor of The Examiner, see Lord Craven. He was closely watched as a Jacobite sympathiser, and in the tense year of 1745 Horace Mann was frequently at him: 'he has done more harm in this way than can be conceived'.1 Holdsworth was 'notoriously attached to the Pretender ... and is known to debauch the sentiments of the young English';2 he proposed having Holdsworth's baggage searched since 'I have assurances that he never came out or returned to England without letters of consequence from or to the principal people of that party'.3  Holdsworth's academic character was less contentious. His friend (and posthumous editor) Joseph Spence said he made 'more journies to Italy than perhaps any gentleman in this age; studied Virgil's works, in particular, on the very spot where he wrote them (for he staid much longer than usual at Naples); and always carried some interleaved edition of Virgil with him, to take down his observations as they arose. His principal aim was to acquire a more perfect insight into the Georgics'.4 James Russel, who called him an 'ingenious, learned [and] prudent' tutor,5 included him with William Drake of Shardeloes in a conversation piece which he painted in Rome in 1744 (Shardeloes). Russel's father thought Holdsworth was flattered in the picture and wished to see 'the rough lineaments of his honest countenance more exactly expressed'.6 A sketch of Holdsworth made in Rome in 1741 by C.F. Ponzone remains untraced.  From Florence in 1743 and Rome in 1744 Holdsworth submitted some architectural ideas for the extension of Magdalen College.7 At his death his papers passed to Charles Jennens and letters from Holdsworth to Jennens remain in a private collection. An eighteenth-century manuscript book of travel notes, signed Holdsworth, is at the Villa I Tatti; Thomas Townson described how on his first visit to Italy Holdsworth had composed 'with some care an account of what he saw. On visiting the same country again, with his former journal in his hand, he altered the narrative, and contracted the substance of it. When he made the same tour a third time, he burnt his papers.'8
In 1755 Holford succeeded John Birtles as British consul in Genoa and his appointment was renewed on 17 June 1760 and 6 February 1761.1 Holford had probably long resided in Genoa; in January 1774 Lady Mary Coke wrote that 'the King's Consul Mr Holdford has been with me; 'tis more than forty years that he has been in this employment'.2 He was asked to attend Count Vorontsov, the Russian Chancellor, in September 1763,3 Sir William Farington met him on several occasions in Genoa in March 1765,4 and the Duke of Gloucester lodged with him late in 1771.5 He died in Genoa 'of a slow fever' on 30 October 1776.6
Holgate travelled as tutor to Michael Pepper; they were in Venice on 6 November 1779,1 and in Rome the following month.2 Hippisley mentioned 'Parson Hilgate & his Pupil Mr Pepper' in Rome in January 1780,3 and George Holgate presented an Italian dictionary inscribed 'Rome Jany 1780' to John Soane. He and Pepper left Rome with Soane on 19 April 1780, bound for Florence.4
His first visit to Italy in 1731, as Henry Fox, was made to retrench financially after he had extravagantly run through a large part of his fortune. By December 1731 he had been sailing on the Po between Ferrara and Venice,1 he had been reported in Parma, and had arrived at Rome, where he sat to Antonio David in 1732 (priv. coll.).2 He returned briefly to England in September 1732 before joining Mrs Strangways-Horner for a further two years abroad, spent partly in Paris and Nice. He was also in Turin in 1734, when he was an interested observer of the Lombard campaigns in the War of the Polish Succession.3  Failing health brought Lord Holland, as he had become, to Italy again more than thirty years later.4 Lord and Lady Holland left England on 23 September 1766 with their youngest son, Henry Edward Fox (1755-1811, later a General) and Clotworthy Upton (later Lord Templetown). At Lyons they were joined by their sons Charles James Fox and Stephen, with his new wife Lady Mary, and Lady Holland's nephew Lord Offaly (see William, Marquess of Kildare). Lord Holland, Charles Fox and Lord Offaly then sailed to Naples from Marseilles on 31 October, the others continuing overland. Lady Holland's spirited letters to her sister5 described the overland journey. From Bologna they came to Florence, where they stayed from 9 to 14 November; the Uffizi contained 'a vast deal of tiresome stuff. I shall never grow virtu', and a conversazione and concert at Horace Mann's was dismissed as 'an English assembly with the addition of a concert, only think how horrid! ... we never saw such a set of vulgar stupid looking women' (18 Nov. 1766). They hurried on through Rome, where Lady Holland saw her 'cousin' the Young Pretender and his brother Cardinal York, to reach Naples on 27 November (2 Dec. 1766).  Lord Holland had meanwhile arrived on the 11th (18 Nov. 1766), William Hamilton then describing him as 'very weak', although Lady Mary Fox and Lord Offaly assured him that he was better than he had been for some time.6 They stayed four months in Naples, but three weeks was sufficient for Lady Holland to pass judgment. The city was 'excessively populous'; the common people were 'the most lazy ... in the world ... the great people are made up of ignorance, pride, debauchery and show'-while Mrs Catherine Hamilton [generally considered quite blameless] was 'as affected and stupid as possible'; there were eighty stairs to their rooms, which she walked, though Lord Holland was carried (19 Dec. 1766). Lord Holland improved somewhat during his stay but his spirits were often low. Late in February Stephen and Lady Mary left the main party at Naples (to rejoin them some four weeks later in Florence).  Meanwhile in the course of the Carnival ,Upton, according to Kildare, became 'very much in love ... with the Princess a Recca. I can't say much for her beauty, mais chacun à son gôut'.7 But he left Naples 'very low spirited' with the Hollands on 14 March. After a brief stay in Rome (where Kildare rejoined them) they spent two weeks in Florence from the end of March. Mann, waiting for them to arrive, wrote that 'by the accounts I have received of [Lord Holland's] health I fear that he has not reaped that benefit from the air of Naples, which a longer stay might possibly have produced';8 Lady Holland entirely approved of Mann, 'the most obliging polite man that ever lived' (13 Apr. 1767). Lord Holland meanwhile reflected that 'no man's [mind] has been more entirely [vacant] than mine has been this half year'.9 After three days in Milan the party broke up in Turin: Charles left to meet the 2nd Earl Fitzwilliam in Genoa and Stephen and Lady Mary returned directly home. After spending a week in Geneva at the beginning of the month, Lord and Lady Holland arrived back in England on 25 May.
By the age of five Lord Holland had lost both his parents and he was brought up by his uncles, Charles James Fox and Lord Ossory. After leaving Oxford he went abroad in 1791, spending some time in Spain. He was in Italy in 1793 when he met Sir William Hamilton in Naples.1 In December 1793 he met Lord Granville Leveson-Gower at Majorca and they sailed together to Leghorn, arriving on 23 January 1794; 'he is really a very good and pleasant fellow', said Lord Granville, adding that he spoke Spanish very well.2 On 29 January they arrived in Florence, where Holland first met Lady Webster, the intelligent but discontented young wife of a comparatively elderly husband. Their relationship dominated his subsequent movements.3  'He is not in the least handsome', wrote Lady Webster on first seeing him; 'he has, on the contrary, many personal defects, but his pleasingness in manner and liveliness of conversation get over them speedily. He is just returned from Spain, and his complexion partakes of the Moresco hue. He is now in better health. He has a complex disorder, called an ossification of the muscles in his left leg'. She liked his 'gaiety beyond anything I ever knew' and he was 'full of good stories'. Holland and Lord Granville with Charles Beauclerk, 'silent and sulky', met the Websters in Naples that spring; Holland was 'sometimes too boisterous, and may occasionally overpower one, but he is good-humoured enough to endure a reproof', wrote Lady Webster. In May 1794 they were all in Rome, Lord Holland introducing Lady Webster to the verse of William Cowper and earning the name of sal volatile for his liveliness. Holland and Beauclerk saw the Websters briefly at Florence (where the Websters' last child was then born), as they went to Venice, where they arrived on 27 May.4 Holland was in Bergamo on 14-15 June,5 but he was soon back in Florence, awaiting the arrival of his friend Lord Wycombe, who came in July. Together these two went off to Rome and Naples in October, returning to Florence in November. There Holland gave a great ball on 21 November to celebrate his majority. The winter was passed in Florence, and on 25 March 1795 he gave Lady Webster verses for her birthday.  Her husband, Sir Godfrey Webster, returned to England alone in May 1795 and in June Holland and Lady Webster were together in Lucca. According to Lady Berwick, Lord Holland spent the summer there with Lady Webster (who, however, left in July), Lord Wycombe and 'a Frenchman', 'turning to ridicule religion and Government'.6 The Frenchman was doubtless one of the French painters Gauffier or Fabre. In 1795 Gauffier painted Lord Wycombe (Bowood), Sir Godfrey and Lady Webster (priv. coll.) and Lord Holland, while Fabre painted six portraits of Lord Holland (NPG; Eton College, etc.).7 Lord Holland even commissioned a small portrait of Napoleon from Gauffier, which he received in 1797.8 There was an excursion to Pisa and Leghorn with Mrs Frances Wyndham (the estranged wife of the Hon. William Wyndham) and Lady Webster, and they later went to Genoa. Holland visited Turin on his own. He was reading Pope's Iliad to Lady Webster at Florence in August 1795. In November they accompanied Mrs Wyndham to Bologna, and then Holland and William Wyndham went on to Turin. The winter was again passed in Florence, and in February Holland accompanied Lady Webster and her children to Rome.  Morritt saw them in Naples early in March 1796, commenting that Lady Webster was 'travelling' with Lord Holland, 'for that is the phrase', he explained, adding that there were 'four or five more of these 'travelling' couples'.9 In March Holland paid Angelica Kauffmann in Rome for a picture of three girls singing.10 In April they were in Florence, Lord Holland driving Lady Webster to Prato on 11 April; he returned alone to Florence, where he asked Thomas Penrose to act as his agent for the works of art he had bought or commissioned in Florence, principally the portraits by Gauffier and Fabre (the list included the 'petit portrait en pied de Mylord Holland par Gauffier, celui de Milady Webster, celui du Chevalier Webster, un portrait de femme [Lady Bessborough]').11  Holland was in Rovigo on 22 April 1796 and he caught up with Lady Webster in Padua the next day.12 They left on 24 April and proceded to Trieste, thence to Vienna and England. In November 1796 Lady Webster gave birth to their son, and they married the following year. They were to become the leaders of Whig society at Holland House in London.
The Hollands had been 'for some years' in Rome when Sarah Bentham met them there in January 1794.1 They were living in the Strada Gregoriana in 1794 and 1795, their respective ages given as 32 and 27 in the parish register.2 Holland was asthmatic and his wife, 'a most amiable person', was 'ingenious and industrious'.3 C.H. Tatham's letters to his former teacher (and John Holland's brother) Henry Holland make frequent friendly references to the John Hollands; Mrs Holland copied many of Tatham's ornament drawings 'with an attention and skill what would astonish you much; Landscape and other styles she performs with equal taste and judgement'. The Hollands were in Venice in May 1794 and Lucca (where they were briefly joined by Richard Westmacott) in July;4 they had returned to Rome from the baths at Lucca 'two months back', wrote Tatham on 15 February 1795 and were then considering going to Naples with Mr & Miss Gascoyne. In the spring of 1795 Gandy reported that John Holland was almost murdered in Rome.5 They were in Venice in June 1795 (7 Jun.) and spent that summer in Lausanne,6 returning to Rome in November (11 Nov. 1795, 30 Jan. 1796). In May 1796 they were still in Rome 'in great suspense' as the French advanced, and Tatham listed some objects for Henry Holland that he had put in John Holland's case for transport to England (13 May); they had moved to Naples by July (8 Jul. 1796).


Hollis the republican, 'over six feet tall, Herculean in size and strength', with 'an incomparable manner of gentleness',1 went twice to Italy. Of his first tour, made in 1748-9 with his close friend Thomas Brand (later Brand-Hollis), he left 'a curious and copious journal' (untraced),2 with comments on 'arts and sciences, public roads, manufactures, trade, antiquities, and what is called virtu'. He admired Leonardo's Last Supper at Milan, uncovered 'about 20 or 25 years ago, by the means of an English traveller, who had memorandums of [it]' and observed the horrors of war throughout the Genoese state. But he did not think well of the Italians: 'cicisbeying has destroyed almost all manliness and virtue in Italy; and so low are the present Italians degenerated from the magnanimity of their ancestors ... that they even copy the French in most points, as the standards of politeness'. There was also a 'fuller and more circumstancial' journal of his second tour of 1750-3 (untraced), giving his intended itinerary across the Continent and 'throughout all Italy (except those parts of it which I have already seen)'.3 Brand was in Italy at the same time, but they followed different routes. Hollis came from Trieste to Venice, 'where a person's private character and morals are little regarded, provided they do not affect the state'. He stayed there from 8 December 1750 to 28 February 1751, dining 'divers times with the resident Sir James Grey [Gray]' and befriending Joseph Smith (with whom he later corresponded and from whose will he was to benefit).4 It is possible that he met Canaletto, from whom he commissioned six views (five English, one Italian) executed c.1754-5;5 it is sometimes alleged that Brand and Hollis appear together in Canaletto's Piazza di Campidoglio and the Cordonata, Rome (Christie's, 8 Dec. 1989), but they were not together in Venice. Hollis met Brand in Rome,6 and sat for a miniature ivory relief, dated 14 April 1752, by Andrea Pozzi (Harvard, Houghton Library), who also drew Brand. They travelled together to Naples, the depopulation of the Campagna surprising them as they went. Brand left on 22 May, but Hollis stayed on alone; three times he climbed Mount Vesuvius, the first time with Brand, and in 'the last month of [his] stay at Naples' [August] he sailed to Sicily and Malta, seeking a cure for jaundice in the sea air. At Messina he met 'Mr [George] Tatem, the Consul, [and] Messieurs [Stanier] Porten, Murry [?] and Capithorne'. He remarked on the dreadful toll taken by the plague in Messina ('no less than 70,000 of its inhabitants'), and gave careful descriptions of Syracuse, Catania, Agrigentum and Taormina; their antiquarian riches contrasted with Malta where, said Hollis, 'there is not a public library nor a single bookseller'. Hollis left Naples on 22 September to rejoin Brand in Rome, and it was probably on this second visit to Rome in 1752 that Hollis sat for the portrait (dated Rome 1752) now at Harvard by Richard Wilson, from whom he also commissioned a view of the Grotto in Villa Madama.7 Brand and Hollis visited the miniature painter la Tibaldi ('who was to have entered the service of the late Prince of Wales'), met the antiquarian Pancrazi in Cortona, 'Padre Hugford', who painted upon marble at Vallombrosa, and Thomas Jenkins. The two friends parted at Verona, and Hollis went on alone to Milan and Genoa, where he noticed how much war damage had been repaired since his last visit some four years before. Blackburne's account of the travel diaries ended with a list of friendships made abroad, which included Francesco Algarotti, Camillo Paderni (keeper of the museum at Portici), Piranesi and the Abbé Venuti (whose Roma Antica owed its posthumous publication to Hollis).8  After his return Hollis twice offered advice to travellers in Italy: in 1753-4 he wrote two letters of Advice to a young Painter at Rome,9 and in September 1760 a memorandum for William Taylor How which included the caveat 'no virtu of any kind to be purchased in Italy for the first six months; and with great caution afterwards', and he also recommended that English company, customs, dress, houses and retainers were 'for the general to be avoided'.10 Much of his collection of antique sculpture passed to the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, in 1850.11
The Holman travelling in Italy with William Stafford-Howard in 1709-11 (when both were described as 'Grandsons to my Lord Stafford who was beheaded')1 was either William or his younger brother Charles (c.1692-1717). William was in Rome with Robert Dickens between May and November 1714,2 and he came to Venice in January 1715 for the Carnival.3

Thomas Holmes, probably a merchant, wrote from Zante to Samuel Egerton on 1 January 1734 expressing his thanks to Joseph Smith for 'his civilities to me at Venice'.1 On 20 July 1736 Thomas Holmes 'Brother to Martha Duchess of Wharton' [Martha Holmes, d. 1726] was in Padua.2
An English gentleman, of the name of Holmes, with whom I am intimate', accompanied William Fox on expeditions from Naples to Pozzuoli and Baia in December 1793 (W. Fox, Sketches and Observations, 247).
On his retirement from the army in 1763 Holroyd spent four years travelling on the Continent. In the summer of 1763 he was staying at Lausanne, where he began his lifelong friendship with Edward Gibbon (whose works he would eventually edit). Holroyd described his travels in a journal1 and in a series of spirited letters addressed to his family (Holroyd letters MSS; dates cited in brackets) which together reveal a sharp eye both for people and places (particularly fortifications).  Holroyd arrived in Turin with his travelling companions Major Richard Ridley and Theophilus Bolton2 in July 1764. Their visit coincided with that of the Duke of York, but Holroyd was not in awe of Royalty. He described the King of Savoy as 'a miserable, sneaking, creeping, sore eyed little Fellow', and his Queen was 'a yellow skinny crooked Spaniard without a sound book in her head'. He visited the Academy at Turin, 'the only use of which place for the English is to breed fine Gentlemen. They acquire a thorough knowledge of Dress, and make the Academy Life extremely expensive which in itself is surprizingly cheap. All but one keeps a fine Equipage & running Footmen'. British subjects were treated well in Turin: 'we are even permitted to see the famous subterraneans of the Citadell, an honour not granted even to subjects in other countries'. In the same letter Holroyd described the cicisbeo 'as necessary furniture for a lady, to attend her when she goes abroad, as a footman is in England, & if he is agreable & has any address, believe the ladies are very reasonable' (4 Sep. 1764). He passed through Genoa and sailed to Leghorn, thence to Florence, where he again met Gibbon and William Guise, his old acquaintances from Lausanne.3  James Martin met Holroyd, Ridley and Bolton, newly arrived in Rome, on 28 October 1764.4 Holroyd remarked that the Pope and Cardinals 'are really very like other people, except the Pope who is so overwhelmed with Vestments that he much resembles a Tortoise with a little Head standing out' (5 Dec. 1764). For the Carnival, he and Peregrine Bertie dressed up their dogs and put them in a coach 'with two dogs of their acquaintance' and, 'rolling ourselves up in Skins as Humble imitation of Bears', they stood on top of the coach, pelting 'all our acquaintance to whom at that time we were utterly incog:'; the coachmen and servants were 'equipt as Devils'; their bravado was appreciated, 'the Romans [being] so rude as to astonish by their general acclamation & applause'. Holroyd sat for his portrait, and had a Papal audience during which 'the old Gentleman was extremely gracious rubbed his face & Head, smiled, attempted to laugh' and 'assured me he should be very glad to be of any service to me' (8 Mar. 1765). On 15 March 1765 he left Rome for Naples, the journey being full of 'Bugs and bad inns'. He was presented to the young King, 'a little puny white thing with a very good natured countenance. He is very clever as to managing little Puppet Shows. I do not hear that he is taught anything else' (7 Apr. 1765). In Naples he found Sir William Stanhope 'extremely civil & one of the most agreable Men I ever met with' (7 Apr. 1765).  One of his travelling companions [doubtless Bolton] was taken ill in Naples (7 May 1765) and they stayed in a house in the country with John Wilkes, while his second companion Ridley was on the Isle of Ischia for 'upwards of six weeks for the sake of the baths' (4 Jun. 1765). In June Holroyd left Naples, sailing to Marseilles in the Centurion under Commodore Thomas Harrison. Ridley returned to Marseilles with John Wilkes on the St Pierre, leaving Naples on 27 June.5 Holroyd travelled through the south of France and returned to Genoa where he spent '8 or 9 days' with the 5th Earl of Berkeley. He then moved rapidly across northern Italy to Venice (9 Sep. 1765), where he spent twelve days. By 3 October he was in Vienna, and his last letter was from The Hague on 10 January 1766. Both Holroyd and Ridley became members of Edward Gibbon's Roman Club.6

Holt's first visit to Italy was made with John Monro. In January 1746 Horace Mann heard that Holt, Monro, John Bouverie and Richard Phelps had been paying court to the Pretender in Rome,1 where Holt and Monro were lodging in the Selciata di S.Sebastianello in 1746.2 On 16 May 1747 they had returned from Rome to Florence, 'on the way, 'tis said, to England', wrote Mann, adding 'I should think some notice would be taken of them, as their behaviour in Rome has been so publicly insolent'.3 While in Rome Holt commissioned James Russel to draw some statues for him,4 and in July 1749 Russel had dedicated the second plate in his Letters to Holt, in recognition of 'favours received during his residence abroad'.5  Holt set out again from England in October 1749,6 this time with the Rev. Edward Ventris. They had originally planned to leave Rome in September 1750, but stayed until the following May.7 Holt engaged James Russel as his antiquarian and commissioned from him more drawings of statues. They were back in England in July 1751, and in October James Russel received a letter from his father in London, saying that he had presented to Holt 'a sett of the Letters large paper', and that he hoped his son had been paid.8 Russel replied that Holt had paid him very generously as an antiquarian, 'but never mentioned anything to me as to the engraving; he likewise paid me before hand for the drawing of several statues, many of which I have finished'.9 The drawings were finally dispatched in July 1753.10



As a young man Patrick Home had studied in Leipzig and had afterwards been an ornament of the Prussian Court at Charlottenburg. Following an unsuccessful romance he travelled in 1750-1 on the Continent, his itinerary including Florence and Rome.1  He returned to Italy in middle age, after he had built Paxton House and while Wedderburn Castle was being extensively rebuilt. Although he had evidently lost much of his youthful charm he married, late in May 1771 in Nice, Jane Graham. She had left London in September 1770 and since November had kept a rather uncharitable journal in Nice describing her English acquaintances. The Homes went on together through the south of France and Switzerland, arriving in Turin in September 1771. Their Italian tour lasted six years and was not altogether happy; their itinerary, some of their experiences and much of their expenditure are documented in the Home manuscripts (Home MSS). It is clear Home devoted an increasing amount of time and energy to acquiring works of art for Wedderburn, a great proportion of which were carefully commissioned copies.  They spent five months in Naples, from December 1771 to April 1772. They were conscientious tourists, and Patrick Home compiled neatly-written accounts of their excursions for this first year. Mrs Home described her ascent of Vesuvius, carried in a chair on the shoulders of eight (her husband said four) men: 'at every stage they sunk a foot and slid back into the cinders and ashes' (30 Mar.). From Naples they returned to Rome where they spent six months, until October 1772. Home discussed Raphael's stanze at some length in his journal, and once encountered James Byres in front of the Fire in the Borgo, but the antiquary's commentary was 'not very much to the purpose' (3 Oct. 1772). He visited Mengs, Hewetson and Maron in their studios, noting that Maron 'married to Mengs's sister who paints in miniature [but] both appear mightly low in their profession' (25 Apr.). He thought the ceiling by Mengs in the church of S.Eusebio 'a great modern performance, the colour admirable, but not very correct in the drawing' (24 Aug. 1772). His comments on the English portraits in Batoni's studio were restrained, ranging from 'but tolerable' for Thomas Hampden and his wife, 'interesting' for the Williams Wynn group, to 'strikingly like' for Lionel Damer (30 Apr.). His lengthy accounts of Roman collections reflect conventional taste, and he found the fine execution of Bernini's Rape of Proserpina in the Villa Ludovisi was 'un peu maniéré' (5 Sep.).  In February 1773 they were in Pisa, where Home bought three marble chimneypieces from Francisco Montelatici. They were in Florence in April,2 but most of 1773 was spent in the Veneto. In Venice Home visited the Scuola di S.Rocco where he found Tintoretto 'great and terrible in his manner, but incorrect in his drawing and design, excellent colouring' (1 Jun. 1773). He saw consul John Udny and met consul Joseph Smith's widow, (née Elizabeth Murray) from whom he bought twenty-five paintings (listed in his journal, 16 Jun. 1773): they included twelve views and landscapes by Antonio Diedrich, Zuccarelli, Vanvitelli, and Canaletto, 'perhaps among the best views [he] ever painted ... these were all retouched Several times, so soon as any defects were discovered'; there were two pastel copies, 'by Belli or Rosalba', of the Correggios Smith had sold to George III (originals unidentified; the copies at Paxton House), and a pastel of Frederick the Great. From Venice the Homes went on to spend seven weeks at Recoaro and returned late in September to Florence, where they stayed at Vanini's. The account book shows that they saw Lady Orford's Villa on the Fiesole Hill; Mrs Home took harpsichord lessons and had the Abbé Pilori as her cicerone for a month. The winter of 1773-4 was spent in Rome. Home bought '26 Heads of Raphael in Lapis by Paolo Fidanza' in December; he employed a teacher of architecture for a month, and Gasparini gave Mrs Home sixteen lessons (presumably on the harpsichord). On 5 March the Homes were in Capua with the Abbé Grant on their way to Naples,3 where the Abbé was much taken with Home's 'sweet and charming lady'.4 In February Home had bought another marble chimneypiece (Wedderburn Castle) from Piranesi; it had been recommended by Father Thorpe to Lord Arundell as being 'one of the most elegant things of its kind, every member of it is worked most exquisitely',5 but Piranesi 'sold it very soon after he had given me the sketch of it. It was purchased by a Mr Hume of Scotland, who some time ago went to Naples with Abbé Grant'.6 They returned to Rome in April 1774 and the summer was spent in Pisa and Siena. In Florence in October Home bought his wife a pearl necklace and a diamond cross, but his largest expenditure was on five marble chimneypieces from Francis Harwood. In a letter to Harwood (Rome, 29 Nov. 1774) Home urged him to complete the work: 'the Rooms for wch these Chimney-Pieces are intended [at Wedderburn] are all in Readyness for them, and it wd be mighty agreable to me, they could be sent Home ye next summer'. They spent nineteen days in Rome, lodged with a Mrs Catherine Smith, and proceeded to Naples for five months, until May 1775. Tierney and Becher acted as his bankers there and, when they left Naples in May, Tierney had several items to ship to England: three tables, six vases and a chimneypiece originally made for the Marquis de Matignon, 'with some other trifles snuff-boxes &c', all made from Vesuvian lava; copies made by Figliolino in 1774 of paintings by Raphael, Correggio, Guido Reni and Parmigianino, and another copy of a Guercino Magdalen 'done some years ago by a young Painter of great merit'-all to be 'carefully Rolled up & sent to England'. There were also a great number of books, painted fans and four water-colour views of Naples.  Home commissioned more copies in Rome. In June 1775 he paid Colin Morison for a copy of Raphael's School of Athens (in which Cesi painted some parts of the architecture; Smith [James Smith, the American], was paid for three copies (from Guido Reni, Guercino and Caravaggio), and David Allan for two more copies, one of them Guido Reni's Aurora. On 3 June 1775 Home wrote (to Thomas Chase at Lord Tylney's in Florence) that the Aurora copy, 'considering that now no person whatever is allowed to copy it from ye original, it is not a very bad one, tho' very indifferently coloured. This copy was done from an old Copy, in Belloni's hand, but I believe principally from Frey's Print'. In a later letter to Morison, Home regretted to say that he thought his countryman Allan painted 'for Money, more than reputation' (23 Jul. 1775), and in the end Home appears not to have taken the picture ('I shall think no more of Mr Allan's 'Aurora''; to Morison, 4 Sep. 1775). They were in Lucca in July 1775, staying in the house 'Mr and Mrs Hervey had last season, which is the best in the place, and within twenty yards of the baths', Home told Chase (9 Jul. 1775); 'we are as regular as clockwork. Rise before four. Breakfast twixt seven and eight. Dine at one. Walk out in ye Evg. Sup at Eight and to bed at 9. What a contrast to our Naples Life, last Winter'. He made a further payment to Harwood in Florence, where they were staying from August to mid-November 1775, but Home became somewhat exasperated by the sculptor's lack of progress, and the first three chimneypieces were 'far from pleasg. me' (10 Nov. 1775).  The Homes had intended to return to England in 1775, but Mrs Home's poor health and a return of her 'nervous disorder' made them change their plans. Home anxiously asked Morison whether his copy of the School of Athens would survive another year 'cas'd up', and whether the Smith pictures he had bought in Venice, now back in Scotland, would be better left in their cases (23 Jul. 1775). They stayed in Rome eight months from November 1775 to June 1776, during which Mrs Home succumbed to the advances of a young artist called Moore-it is unproven that he was Jacob More. The affair was discovered early in 1776. Mrs Home was forgiven and she turned contritely to the Roman church; her journal was now filled with urgent prayers for her salvation and her husband's conversion. Home meanwhile continued to purchase works of art: landscapes by Gregorio Fidanza, 'the Duchess of Beauforts miniature', and there was a payment 'to setting my Minerva. Gold and Workmanship'; in June he bought a marble chimneypiece from Carlo Albacini. In March 1776 Home had met the painter Robert Home, to whom he paid 20 sequins for a copy the following year. In July 1776 they were briefly in Nocera, where Home deplored the condition of Raphael's Madonna: 'pity it has lost and loosing so much every day. The Virgin's drapery is cut and torn in two or three places' (letter of 8 Jul. 1776). They moved to Florence in August and stayed for eight months, until April 1777. While he referred in September to his wife's health being 'so indifft.', he was embarking upon a concentrated period of picture purchases, over 80 for a total cost of 'Abt. 500 Gns.'. They included relatively 'primitive' works, called Ghirlandaio ('Grillandaio'), Pinturicchio, Perugino, Lorenzo Lippi and Durer; mannerist pictures by Tintoretto, Bronzino and Vasari, besides many exemplifying more orthodox taste by, for example, Onorio Marinari, Cagnacci, Guido Reni, Salviati, Cortona and Joli, and copies of Correggio and Del Sarto; he also bought three intaglios, and marbles by Giovanni di Bologna ('giocente col su letticciolo'; Paxton House) and Donatello. Home completed his payments to Harwood on 14 August 1776.  From Florence they travelled north to Modena and Parma, where Home went three times to the Accademia to see Correggio's Madonna and S.Jerome, 'in the highest preservation ... probably the finest picture art ever produced'; he found James Smith copying it and a Parmesan making a small pastel of it, for which he wanted 200 sequins, 'an amazing price'; Home bought from him instead a Guido Reni drawing of St John and the Child which 'was in the Farnese collection and stolen from it when that collection was sent to Naples' (2 May 1777). The Homes were at Lyons on 1 June 1777; in December 1778 Patrick Home leased a house for his wife near Vevay for six months, while he returned alone to England. His portrait by Reynolds of c.1780 (Paxton House) shows an elderly, withdrawn and hardened man; his wife never came to Wedderburn and eventually entered a Carmelite convent in Belgium.
After he had attended the RA schools and received some encouragement from Angelica Kauffman, Robert Home was sent by his father to Italy. 'A great genius in painting he is a son of a worthy gentleman', wrote Alexander Grant in December 1773, when Robert Home was about to set out for Rome 'for his improvement'.1 Home was living in the Via Babuino in 1776 and 1777 with William Miller.2 Patrick Home described giving Robert Home 'some little employment' in a letter from Rome of 3 March 1776 and on 8 September he wrote from Florence to Robert Home in Rome saying how Thomas Jenkins had 'always expressed much good will towards you'; he mentioned a copy of The Fortune Tellers and pointed out that it was wrong of him to undertake his [Patrick's] portrait when his other occupations prevented him from finishing it'.3 Thomas Jones met him several times in Rome from 27 November 1776; on 30 August 1777 he attended a dinner 'at the German house to take leave of Hume who set off for England this Ev'g'.4 While in Rome Thomas Banks modelled a colossal head of him, which was shown at the RA in 1781.

Giorgio Home di Lord Kames' arrived in Venice on 3 May 1768.1 In June 1769 at Florence he delivered a letter of introduction from Horace Walpole, dated London 25 November 1768, to Horace Mann,2 and he was presumably the 'Mr Hume' drawn by Thomas Patch in Florence in 1769.3 He was in Rome in August 1769; he left for Frascati on the 29th, intending to go on to Naples.4 His portrait by Maron, presumably painted at Rome, is in a private collection.
Nothing is known about Samuel Hone's training. At Easter 1752 Hone was listed in Rome living with Richard Wilson near the Piazza di Spagna.1 In Joshua Reynolds's Italian sketch book in the BMPL is a drawing inscribed 'Master Hone' (Reynolds had arrived in Rome in May 1752). On 3 September 1752 he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno, Florence.2 On 14 January 1753 Samuel's elder brother, Nathaniel (later to become a foundation member of the RA), was elected to the same Florentine Academy.2 This must have been arranged in absentia by Samuel, since Hone's Diary shows that at the relevant period Nathaniel was in London.3 Samuel, in Florence, received money from Nathaniel, presumably to pay for the Academy's registration fees.3  By October 1754 Samuel Hone was moving house in Dublin;4 he subsequently went to Jamaica where he died at an unknown date (Strickland). No work by Samuel Hone is known today. A miniature of Samuel by his older brother Nathaniel (Phillips, 2 Mar. 1987), signed and dated 1748, gives the sitter's age as twenty-two.





Hooke was travelling in Italy with Thomas Noel in 1767-8. They had passed through Turin by June 17671 and 'Noel and Cook' were in Florence, with a Mr Hall and a Mr Trent on 12 September 1767.2 Early in 1768 they were joined in Rome by Robert Grimston and John Blois. In a letter of 30 March Grimston described how they had 'messed together for this two months' living 'merrily'; and as he wrote, Hooke, a 'very honest, worthy, good kind of a man', was 'making a confounded noise over my Head, whether he is trying to improve the Roman breed or no, he knows best, all as I know is that the Bed creaks devilishly'.3 Noel, Hooke and Grimston left Rome together in the summer to travel home. After spending two or three weeks in Venice, their progress was delayed when Hooke was taken ill in Turin 'with an immense fever & a prodigious swelled head which has now lasted him twenty Days. He has been given over three or four times, but at last ... is much recovered, & I fancy that in less than a fortnight we shall be setting out'.4
He was in Padua on 14 October 1711, on the same day as Gabriel Liniere who was probably his tutor,1 and had arrived in Naples, from Rome, in February 1712.2


Charles, Lord Hope, suffered from perpetual ill-health and did not live to succeed to the title, which passed to his younger brother James. It appears that James left the army especially to join his brother in Rome in March 1763.1  Lord Hope meanwhile was in Florence in November 1762 and was expected in Rome in December.2 He passed quickly through, and went on to Naples. James Adam recorded seeing much of him with his tutor William Rouet in Rome after their return from Naples in January 17633 and it was undoubtedly through Adam that Lord Hope commissioned a group of 21 Roman views from Clérisseau (priv. colls.). On 5 March 1763 Winckelmann was about to show Lord Hope round Rome with the 4th Duke of Gordon and a Mr Stephenson.4 Lord Hope was then impatiently awaiting the arrival of his brother, who had written from Villafranca.5 After James had arrived, the Abbé Grant ingratiated himself with 'my Lord Hope and his brother, the Captain', and writing in September 1763 he remembered that 'this last winter and spring ... I passed two months with them in the country at Tivoli where we were most happy'.6  In Rome the brothers sat to Nathaniel Dance for whole-length portraits (both at Hopetoun), of which Lord Hope's was begun on 6 February 1763.7 The contrast between them is marked, the wan Lord Hope leaning against a tree, and James standing robust in his regimentals. The brothers also sat to Dance with their tutor William Rouet (Hopetoun), a picture which James Martin saw in Dance's studio in Rome on 7 May 1764.8 Lord Hope commissioned Gavin Hamilton in 1763 to paint a Brutus promising to avenge Lucretia's death, with five figures, for £250;6 this was a bold commission, and when the picture was finally completed in August 1767 Lumisden pronounced it 'the best picture [Hamilton] has painted'.9 A version of the composition is in the Theatre Royal, London. Lord Hope also bought four landscapes from Solomon Delane in 1763, and Crespin remarked that he 'seems to like Marbles, has made a few Purchases'.5 On 26 March 1763 Winckelmann recorded Lord Hope buying a marble of two putti.10 By August 1763 the brothers were in Vienna, where Lord Hope, at least, remained until February 1764.11
Henry Hope and his tutor John Gillies (who became a noted historian and classicist) were in Rome in November 1772, when the 7th Earl of Findlater observed that Hope's 'body seems stronger than his mind, tho' I believe he don't want sense yet it is wrapped up in such a cloak of clownish awkwardness that there is no getting at it'; Gillies he found 'a strange mean looking Man'.1 The two were living in 'a ridiculously miserable Way, & mix with almost Nobody'.2 Hope and Gillies were painted in Rome in 1773 by David Allan (priv. coll.), and Hope bought his portrait of the architect Niccolo Zabaglia (1664-1750), presumably done from an engraving; he also bought '34 views of Rome'.3
After his visit to Rome with his two brothers Adrian and Thomas in 1795-6, Henry appears to have returned to Italy on his own. 'H.P. Hope', visited the Bodoni press in Parma c.1796,1 and Henry Hope was travelling alone from Mantua to Venice in April 1796, through Verona and Padua.2 On 8 and 12 March 1798 he visited Pacetti's studio in Rome,3 and he was in Naples on 4 February.1 He was subsequently in Rome in June and July 1801 and January 1803.4


On 11 December 1725 Lord Hope and his governor William Dundas had left Florence for Rome.1 'Lord Hope, eldest son of Lord Hopton, a Scot, with his Governor Dundas' was among the 'Several English' in Rome to see the ceremony of the closing of the Holy Door in December.2 He benefited from several letters from his uncle, the 2nd Marquess of Annandale (see James, Lord Johnston), who urged him to cultivate 'the acquaintance and favour of the learned and ingenious men': 'I would rather hear of this, with some of your observations upon Raphael, Bramante, Michelangelo, Bernini and Borromini & ca., than know where you lodge'.3 Hope got to know several antiquarians in Rome, including Ficoroni and the caricaturist P.L. Ghezzi, who thought Milord 'Opp' a 'dilettante molto di cose antiche'; he also met the Marchese Niccolini (whom Robert Adam and Charles Hope-Weir were to meet much later in Pisa).4 Hope undertook several commissions for his uncle and sat for his (unattributed) portrait (priv. coll.; now labelled 'Done in Roma after an illness'), before leaving Rome apparently early in September 1726. He passed through Florence and Bologna (where he made drawings for his uncle of the Villa Albergatti) to Venice where he saw a Carnival and regatta given by Cardinal Ottobani towards the end of September. He stayed on in October to meet the poet Scipio Maffei, and was in Padua on 11 October.5 He then made his leisurely way home through Munich and Paris. He may have returned to Italy in 1737-8. George Sinclair met a Lord Hope in Rome in December 1737.6
It seems impossible to distinguish between the cousins Olivier and John Hope, both of whom visited Italy in the early 1760s. In October 1760 Voltaire wrote of 'un cavaliere chiamato M.Hope, mezzo Inglese, mezzo Ollandese, e richissino ... Egli va a videre tutta l'Italia et la Grecia ancora'.1 Hope visited Cardinal Albani in Rome in 1760, when he made a bad bargain with d'Hancarville over some antique busts,2 and a Hope who, according to Winckelmann, was as disappointing as his father, had been eight days in Rome on 10 April 1761.3 'Mr Hope' was apparently in Naples and Florence in October 1761.4 John Hope ('Gio. Hope') applied to export two granite columns from Rome on 29 June 1761.5 Olivier Hope was evidently in Venice in January 1762,6 and a Hope was in Turin in May.7 Colin Morison was engaged by a Mr Hope for a year in Rome in January 1762 and the same Hope discussed the possibility of an Eastern tour with Winckelmann between April and August 1764.8 A Hope was in Venice in 1764, arriving from Aix-la-Chapelle with Mr Pigot [Robert Pigott] on 27 July, en route for Constantinople; John Morgan remarked that Hope spoke 'english like a native of England'.9  Olivier and John Hope had presented their portraits to Sir John Dick as a mark of gratitude for the attention they had received from him in Italy.10
Heir to the great fortune of the Amsterdam banking house, Thomas Hope travelled extensively as a young man between 1787 and 1795, developing his neo-classical taste through observation and discerning patronage. French was his first language and his English remained broken. He was at least four times in Rome between 1791 and 1795, and he was to visit Italy again in 1802-3 and in 1815-17.1  On 17 December 1791 Hope called on Flaxman in Rome to see his drawings2 and on 30 December he visited Pacetti's studio with Guy Head.3 On 28 January 1792 it was reported that 'Lord Hop', one of the richest men in England, having purchased many antiquities, had left Rome for Naples, whence he would go to Sicily.4 Hope's visit to Sicily was made with the young landscape painter G.A. Wallis,5 but the tour was apparently a short one since Mrs Flaxman listed 'Mr Hope' at a gathering of artists in Rome on 2 April 1792.2 Hope had wished to visit the Middle East, but was dissuaded by a report of plague in Egypt.6  In the course of his first visits to Rome Hope placed several remarkable commissions with Flaxman. On 13 March 1792 Flaxman told Sir William Hamilton that Hope had asked for a set of [109] drawings, one for each book of Dante, and he mentioned the Hercules and Hebe group,7 which Flaxman described to his parents as 'the noblest commission ever brought by an English artist to his own country, it is the restoration of the Torso Belvidere ... its restoration is to be the marriage of Hercules and Hebe, it is to be the size of the original ... it is ordered by Mr Thos.Hope of Amsterdam. I have bargained to make the model here and the marble in England'.8 The original concept was d'Hancarville's, and in the event only the plaster was ever made (Slade School, U. Coll., London). Flaxman was making the Dante engravings in December 1792,9 and the drawings and plates were completed by July 1793, Hope directing that the plates were for his private distribution.10 Hope also bought Flaxman's Cephalus and Aurora and a copy of the Apollo Belvedere (besides several other pieces acquired subsequently in England). Hope's portrait (as a cricketer) was painted in Rome in 1792 by Jacques Sablet (Cricket Memorial Gall., London).  After his family had left Holland for England in the face of the French invasion, Hope was back in Rome in 1795 with his two brothers, Adrian Elias and Henry Philip. Thomas and Henry visited Pacetti's studio in Rome on 14 December 1795; li fratelli di Mr Hope [Adrian and Henry] called on 16 December, and il terzo fratello minore, Adriano called on 20 February 1796.3 In the course of their stay in Rome, all three bought fine antiquities (now dispersed).11 Thomas bought from Thomas Jenkins a cameo of Caligula and a marble Hercules washing Diomeda's hair; from Prince D. Sigismondo Chigi a number of busts and a pair of statues of greyhounds; from Pacetti an Esculapius (from Hadrian's Villa) and an Athlete, and from Fagan's excavations at Ostia in 1797 came the magnificent so-called Greek figures of Hygeia and Athene (Los Angeles). Henry Hope bought from Pacetti a group of Bacchus and Hope (from the Villa Aldobrandini) and a Hermaphrodite. From the same source Adrian Hope bought an Apollo and an Athlete, and from Pierantoni a restored group of Antinous and Hadrian.12 Four of these pieces were exported from Rome in March 1803.13 Guy Head painted portraits of Thomas Hope and one of his brothers in December 1795 (untraced).14  In 1801 Thomas bought in London the surviving portion of William Hamilton's second collection of Greek vases, for 4,500 gns. He was again in Rome from January to March 1803.15

Charles Hope-Weir went to Italy to visit his son William and, at the suggestion of Lord Hopetoun (his older brother), he travelled with Robert Adam. He met William in Pisa in January 1755 and they visited Leghorn together. His relationship with Adam had soured by the time they reached Rome: 'he showed that he did not want that I should go anywhere alongst with him', said Adam, who also accused him of 'many thousand sneaking, scrubbish dirty actions'. Hope-Weir chose Colin Morison as his new companion when he left Rome for Naples, but when he saw Adam there they were cordial, and when they finally separated in Rome Adam confessed that he 'was sorry to part with him'.1  In Rome Hope-Weir sat to Mengs (the portrait remains untraced) and bought from him The Seasons 'painted in Crayons for my Lord Hopetoun, extremely fine of the kind'.2 He also acquired several antique marbles,3 and a wax medallion portrait of himself dated Roma 1755 was set in a pietra dura cabinet which may have been made in Edinburgh soon after his return from Italy (London art market 1994).4 Hope-Weir left Rome on 3 September, intending to stay in Italy 'for some months'. He was going to take the waters at Viterbo; he was in Florence in October, and was to meet his son in Venice. In December he was at Turin with a letter of introduction from Cardinal Albani to the Sardinian Court.5 He was in Frankfurt the following May, and arrived in England on 31 May 1756.6
In Italy with his governor, Tanck, William attended the university at Pisa. In January 1755 he was able to welcome his father and Robert Adam, who particularly noticed his social contacts and his box at the opera. They all visited Leghorn together. William apparently stayed at Pisa while his father went on to Rome and Naples. In October 1755, when his father was in Tuscany, William was in Rome (discourteously noticed by Adam as Charles Hope-Weir's 'blathering son'). His father was to meet him in Venice at the end of the year and take him to France or Germany to complete his education (Fleming, Adam, 122, 125, 127, 356).



A friend of Lord Carmarthen (later 6th Duke of Leeds), Hore was in Rome early in December 1794, when Lady Knight described him as 'very agreable, fond of drawing, and seems every way qualified to enjoy ... Italy'.1 In May 1795 Hore (also 'Hare'/'Harn'/'Horn') went with Lord Carmarthen and Seigneux from Padua to Venice where they stayed three weeks before returning to Padua.2
John Horn met Allan Ramsay and Alexander Cunyngham in Paris in July 1736, and wrote to them from Leghorn on 30 December 1736; he died of consumption in Naples on 3 May 1737 (Ramsay 1992, 33, 287n16).
As a young radical parson of Brentford, Horne had accompanied John Elwes to France in 1763 before setting out for Italy in the autumn of 1765 with a Mr Taylor, also from Brentford.1 They travelled through France, where they met John Wilkes and Laurence Sterne. From Montpellier on 3 January 1766 Horne told Wilkes he was going to meet Sterne in Siena in the summer. He had called on Voltaire in Switzerland sometime in 17652 before coming to Turin, where he stayed before going on to view 'all the great cities of Italy'. He was at Venice for the Carnival (presumably of 1766?). On his return journey he passed through Paris in 25 May 1767.
A number of references to a Mr Horne in Italy in 1763-4 may refer to the same person. A Mr Horne was in Florence between October and December 1763 and on 5 December 1763 Horne and Pickersgill were sharing lodgings in Siena.1 On 9 February 1764 a Mr Horne passed through Capua on his way to Naples.2 In an undated letter Joshua Pickersgill refered to Mr Horne 'now returned from Geneva', as a 'very polite, well educated gentleman, and free from all sort of prejudices. We are often together, either by chance or inclination, and he is of a very amusing Conversation'.3  A Mr Horne, perhaps the same, arrived in Venice on 2 May 1768.4 In September he was in Turin, staying at the Hotel aux Armes d'Angleterre, telling Charles Townley he had passed the Alps three times and had spent the last three months in Switzerland.5 He arrived in Florence on 26 November.6 (He was conceivably the 'Roberto Hord' who arrived in Venice on 27 May 1767, see Andrew Noel). In the Soane Museum there are a number of drawings of Paestum, bound up with others used for Thomas Major's Paestum of 1768, by 'Horne', described as an Englishman living in Florence7 (an Edward Horne subscribed for three copies of Major's Paestum).
In 1704 he signed a merchants' memorial at Leghorn,1 where he died on 1 August 1736.2
On 3 June 1766 Hort wrote to his sister Elizabeth (Lady Caldwell) from Strasbourg describing his recent visit to the Carnival in Venice, 'more calculated for more amusements than any place in the world'; he outlined the daily routine of a Venetian lady, the character of the ridotto, and the seven theatres, of which 'a coach and six might turn upon the stage of the smallest'.1 On his return home he was made a member of Edward Gibbon's Roman Club.2
He was the English chaplain at Leghorn, 'a poor creature', according to Horace Mann.1 In January 1742 he was approached by Oliver St John with a scheme for converting the Jews in Leghorn, see St John. In 1739 Lady Pomfret transcribed a translation by Horton of a poem by Metastasio.2 In 1750, when a schoolmaster in Hampton, he published An Account of the Earthquakes which happened at Leghorn ... 1742.



In October 1711 'Sir Charles Hotham's son' was in Turin with Lord (Henry) Herbert, Lord (Carr) Hervey and Michael Newton;1 Charles Hotham was in Padua on 1 January 1712.2
At the age of fifteen Sir Charles Hotham was sent abroad for his health with the Genevan doctor and poetaster Jean-Baptiste Tollot. He stayed on the Continent for six years during which he 'journeyed throughout the length and breadth of Italy', but little is recorded of his stay. He was in Naples in September 1752.1 In March 1754 his uncle, Sir William Stanhope, decided not to meet him in Venice for Ascension.2 In March 1755 Hotham was in Rome,3 where he met Robert Adam; Adam took his apartment in the Casa Guarnieri4 when Hotham moved to Naples after Easter.5 He returned to England in the spring of 1757. He was again abroad, in Nice, shortly before his death in 1767.
After Admiral Hotham was relieved of his Mediterrranean command in November 1795 he saw no further service. Lady Knight had heard he was in Genoa in August 1793,1 while he was on active service, but he was otherwise noticed in Italy only after his retirement. In December 1795 he was in Rome with a 'Mrs Nuneham' [Newnham]: with Lady Knight they formed a party, according to Lady Berwick, against Prince Augustus, Lady Plymouth and William Pitt Amherst, the factions 'so violent that we must take one part or the other'.2 By the end of December the Admiral and 'Mrs Nuneham' were in Naples: the 'renowned commander' had come 'from Leghorn, where he left Signora Grassini to refit, and took Mrs Newnham in tow for the continuance of his tour abroad', wrote Morritt; 'the stories we hear of his neglect of duty are scandalous, and I believe the French are obliged to Signora Grassini for keeping him windbound in port when they took our Mediterranean convoy'; the Admiral never stirred without Mrs Newnham, and the ladies in Naples were uncertain how to treat her.3 By late February, however, Morritt was on good terms with Mrs Newnham in Naples.4 In April 1796 the Admiral and Mrs Newnham were in Florence being entertained by the Richard Wynnes; they were to leave on 20 April to return straight to England, but 'Mrs Newman' promised to be 'back for the winter'.5 Hotham alone was in Venice on 30 April, in Padua on 9 May (with Admiral Goodall), and Verona on 10 May.6 Mrs Newnham arrived in Naples from Venice on 29 May accompanied by 'a very curious' American called Pierson.7 See Mrs Newnham.
Houblon travelled with his tutor, the Rev. Jonathan Lipyeatt. On their arrival in Turin in July 1758 they were presented at Court and on 8 August Houblon began his residence at the Academy.1 'We live very well, are well lodged and have good masters', he told his father: 'our dancing master is reckoned one of the best in Europe'. He would visit the French or Spanish ambassadors' houses and attend 'Bals Masqués once or twice a Week'; he met the Duke of Savoy ('a most accomplished amiable Prince') and his minister, Orsorio. According to Lipyeatt, it was Lord Charlemont's introduction which led to their being well received in Turin by Madame St Gilles and, through her introduction, by the 2nd Earl of Bristol.2  After some six months at Turin Houblon moved on to Rome and he was in Naples in February for the Carnival. He then retired to 'poor unpeopled Siena' where he 'studied heartily the Italian' for several months. Thereafter he went to Florence, Lucca, where he arrived with Lipyeatt on 10 September 1759,3 and Leghorn, where he was shocked by the condition of three galleys belonging to the Knights of Malta. He spent the winter of 1759-60 in Naples. He was again in Rome for the Easter ceremonies in 1760; on 10 February 1760 he had been 'daily expected' with John Rushout (1738-1800).4 In the summer of 1760 he and Lipyeatt visited Florence with Lord Grey (later 6th Earl of Stamford) and Sir Henry Mainwaring. Houblon and Lipyeatt appear in Patch's Punch Party of 1760, commissioned by Lord Grey (Dunham Massey) and they all travelled to Venice in May and Pola in June, as depicted by Patch in his Antiquaries at Pola (Dunham Massey; inscribed Voyage from Venice to Pola in Istria 1760). Houblon's last excursion in Italy was to see the Carnival in Turin in January 1761, after which, he told his father, 'he had done as much as in him lay towards obliterating what last remained in him of the awkward country Squire; though in one respect he hoped he would never change, viz: in the sentiments of an eager desire to serve his country'.
Laetitia Houblon set out for Italy in 1787 with a young friend of the family, Betsy Watson, who was in weak health. They travelled in their own coach with an English courier, Joseph Dombrey (engaged at £60 per annum). From November 1787 to April 1788 they were in Nice, where they each met their future husbands, Baron von Feilitzsch from Saxony and a Mr Green, the British consul at Nice. They went on to Genoa, Venice for Ascension and Milan for the feast of Corpus Christi. For the next three months they lived by Lake Como, moving at the end of August to Turin, where Betsy Watson married consul Green on 2 October. All three then returned to Nice. Miss Houblon remained in Nice throughout the winter of 1788-9, returning to England in the spring. After a few months she returned to Italy, having met her Baron in Geneva and marrying him in Turin on 24 November 1789. She went with him to Alessandria, where he was garrisoned; in the summer of 1790 they were in Dresden, and in the autumn they joined his regiment in Nice, remaining there until May 1792.


Sir John and Lady Houston went abroad a few months after their marriage, in the forlorn hope that foreign air might cure his syphilis. Their marriage did not survive their travels. Lady Houston's sister, Mary Anne Cathcart, travelled with her as a companion. They were first in Portugal, and reached Genoa from Lisbon in July 1744.1 They were then in Pisa for two weeks and Calci for about three months (in July 1744 Alexander Drummond said he had met them at Leghorn and Pisa2). The winter of 1744-5 was spent in Leghorn. The strained relations between husband and wife deteriorated rapidly, and Lady Houston returned alone in March 1745 to Scotland where she remained until September. She was summoned back to Italy and arrived at Naples in February 1746 with a Mrs Anne Stevenson (sent to accompany Miss Cathcart home). They met Sir John at Portici in February 1746. In May they were all in France; Sir John went on to Lisbon, Miss Cathcart and Mrs Stevenson returned to Scotland, while Lady Houston was settled in a convent in Toulouse. On their return a notorious separation case ensued, heard in Edinburgh in March 1748, which terminated in Lady Houston's favour.3
How travelled for the sake of his health, and in September 1760 was advised on his route and conduct by Thomas Brand Hollis, a near neighbour in Essex.1 Hollis wrote to him at Naples on 15 January 1762, and How wrote to the poet Thomas Gray from Pisa on 25 April 1763,2 forwarding letters from Francesco Algarotti (also an admirer of Hollis); 'Tho' but ill in Health at present, next Wednesday I shall set out towards the ascension at Venice, and afterwards I believe by short stages, & slow Movements to Paris, and the German Spa'. Hollis wrote to him at Frankfurt on 22 July and he was in Brussels on 4 November. When Algarotti died in Pisa in May 1764 he left to How a gold box which the painter Francesco Zuccarelli brought to London the following year.3


Edward Howard travelled in Italy with a Mr Langdale. In December 1763 a letter for Langdale was forwarded from Turin to Florence.1 On 6 May 1764 James Martin dined with Howard, Langdale and the Abbé Grant in Rome.2 In June 1764 David Garrick said he had stayed at Abano near Padua with Howard and Langdale: 'I think it lucky they travell'd together', he wrote; 'the first is a very worthy good natur'd Young Man, & I don't know a better sort of Man than the last - He is prudent & sensible & what he wants in learning is better supply'd by discretion & an Understanding in Spite of his bigottry - I'll answer for it, that Norfolk House is not mistaken in him'.3 Howard sat to Batoni in Rome for a portrait dated 1766 (VAM; Clark/Bowron 295).  It is possible that he was also the Mr Howard in Italy in 1766 with William Constable, to whom James Byres forwarded some letters from Rome on 28 September 1766.4

Henry Howard went to Italy in 1791 warmly recommended by Sir Joshua Reynolds. In a letter of introduction addressed to John, Lord Hervey, at Florence, Reynolds said that Howard's Caractacus (winner of the Academy's gold medal in 1790) was 'the best that had been presented to the Academy ever since its establishment'.1 Howard was in Rome by December 17912 and became friendly with William Theed. In July 1792 Theed was ordering 'long boots' and other things for him3 and mentioning Howard's kindness to him during his illness in 1792.4 In 1793 Howard, described as a history and portrait painter, was lodging in the Strada Gregoriana, below Edmund Garvey.5 On 4 March 1793 the Flaxmans visited him to see his Dream of Cain (exhibited at the RA in 1794) and they met him again on 1 February 1794.6 In April 1794 Howard was one of the signatories of the letter of thanks sent to Prince Augustus (Rome List 1794). Three months later, on 8 July, Howard left Rome. From 24 July to after 2 August he was in Venice with two Russian painters, 'Andrea Markinoff' and 'Vasiilj Prilichatnicoff'7 and he was then intending to travel back through Germany, to reach England in September.4
A man of deeply religious feelings, abstinent and methodical, Howard travelled some fifty thousand miles observing the treatment accorded the least fortunate members of society. He was four times in Italy, but only his first visit could be described as that of a grand tourist. Having succeeded to his father's fortune in 1742 before he was twenty, he went to Italy where, it is said, he acquired or strengthened 'that taste for the fine arts' which led him to collect 'paintings of foreign masters' and other objects of art which furnished his home in Cardington.1 The fine arts, however, were not to loom large in his life. By the time of his second visit in 1769-70, Howard had twice become a widower and had endured imprisonment in France (having been captured at sea when sailing to Portugal in 1756). He conceived his return to Italy as a 'gay and expensive scheme', but his gaiety was soon to be tempered. On 26 November 1769 he wrote, apparently from Turin, criticising Roman religion and blessing God 'for the Reformation: how is religion debased into Show and Ceremony here'. On 4 January 1770, from Abbeville, he was again deploring 'the luxury and wickedness' of the Italians. After wintering in France and Holland, he returned to Italy in April, passing through Genoa, Pisa, Leghorn, Florence and Siena to Rome, 'where', he confided in a journal, 'there are many Monuments to humble the pride of Man and shew how Luxury and Wickedness will sink a Nation'. In another high-minded letter of 22 May from Rome he announced his departure for Naples the next day and his intention to return for the procession on 15 June and stay a fortnight before proceeding home through Loreto, Ancona and Bologna to Venice. In Naples on 27 May he composed a solemn engagement that 'sinful and vain diversions are not my Object but the honour and glory of God'. He also climbed Vesuvius and sent his observations to the Royal Society. In Rome on 16 June he observed the Young Pretender looking 'very stupid; bends double, and is quite altered since I saw him in Paris twenty years ago'.2 By 29 July he was in Heidelberg. His third and fourth visits were made expressly to study penal and welfare systems. He entered Italy in 1778 with 'raised expectations of considerable information, from a careful attention to the prisons and hospitals'. He was first in Venice: in the Doge's prison he found three or four hundred inmates, many of them confined for life. Howard had arrived in Venice on 28 July3 and was described on 17 August as 'just gone', having warned his compatriots against the insalubrity: 'I do not wonder that Howard of Bedford, the jail-man, who is just gone from hence, should advise a young gentleman who is in the house, not to stay above four days lest he should be ill', wrote Dr John Warner.4 From Venice Howard went to Padua and Florence, where the Grand Duke gave him admission to all the prisons in his dominions, and he saw the galley-slaves in Leghorn. In Rome he observed the activities of the Confraternita della Misericordia, and was favourably impressed with the hospital of S.Michele for orphan or destitute boys, where he found the inscription 'It is of little advantage to restrain the Bad by Punishment, unless you render them Good by Discipline'. Henry Swinburne saw him in Rome in 1778 ('Mr Howard, an excellent philanthropist, who makes it the business of his life to travel for the sake of inspecting prisons').5 He went on to Naples, where he calculated that more murders were committed in a year than in 'our three kingdoms put together'. He returned to Rome and passed on to Civitavecchia, where he saw the slaves on the Pope's galleys; an adventurous sea journey then took him to Leghorn. He went on through Lucca and Lerici, where he met Philip Yorke (later 3rd Earl of Hardwicke) with whom he travelled to Genoa. In September 1778 the British consul at Genoa, John Collet, said Howard had left in a great hurry for Milan.6 In Milan he found only four prisoners confined for debt; there were rehabilitation centres, and Howard was allowed to ransom one prisoner whom he found making gold braid. He left Italy through Turin and Savoy. His last visit in 1786 was particularly 'to check the progress of devouring pestilence' by examining lazzarettos. Between January and March 1786 he visited Genoa, Leghorn, Pisa, Florence, Rome and Naples. He sailed to Malta and on to Constantinople, choosing deliberately to return to Venice in a vessel with a foul bill of health so that he might experience quarantine precautions at first hand. He was confined for 42 days, in October and November 1786, emerging weak and feverish. He returned to England in February 1787. When Thomas Watkins was at Zante in 1788 he was told that Howard had 'astonished all who knew him' with his 'simplicity of manners and extreme abstinence'.7  Among Howard's publications were The Edict of the Grand Duke of Tuscany for the Reform of Criminal Law in his Dominions [1789] and An Account of the principal Lazarettos in Europe [1791].
Hoping he would get 'an effectual recommendation to ye Ambassador at Turin', Ralph Howard's brother (writing to him in Paris on 23 February 1751 from Dublin) also fussily advised 'to take care to cross the Alps in a proper season for the snow is as dangerous when it thaws as it is before ye frosts come on'.1 By 12 August 1751 Howard, on his grand tour with Mr Benson, had safely reached Florence, and on that date he commissioned from Charles Martin a copy in crayon of Raphael's Madonna della sedia. Other commissions left in Florence with the Irish Physician, Dr James Tyrrell acting as agent, were for copies of Van Dyck's Cardinal Bentivoglio and Charles V; for a pair of scagliola tables from Don Pietro Belloni and (intended as a present to Howard's uncle, Lord Chief Justice Henry Singleton), marble busts of Cicero and Seneca from Giovanni Piamontini.  His agent in Rome was James Russel. Here Howard sat to Batoni for his portrait (Clark/ Bowron 165; Speed Museum, Kentucky). From Joseph Vernet he commissioned five marine subjects to be delivered to Russel, one by May 1752 and the others by March 1753, and from Thomas Patch four paintings after Vernet (one sold Sotheby's, 17 Nov. 1976). From Simon Vierpyl there were two marble tables, six gesso busts and copies of the Medici Apollo and Clapping Faun, using the best Carrara marble, the work to be done in Rome (see Vierpyl), whereas Joseph Wilton's copy of the Medici Venus was to be sculpted in Florence (but not, it would seem, with Dr Tyrrell's entire approval). Copies of two paintings, a Herodias and a St Cecilia were commissioned from George Chalmers. But it was in his whole-hearted patronage of Richard Wilson that he excelled. There were to be four landscapes, two with banditti, two with historical compositions, a head of a Capuchin, a Venus, and a Narcissus which, with an unspecified subject for Mr Benson, made eight pictures in all.2 Howard's diminutive figure appears between Lord Charlemont and Sir William Lowther in the anonymous painting of a group of grand tourists with Roman monuments in the backround (YCBA). Reynolds had painted his Parody of the School of Athens (NGI) the previous year, and having arrived too late to be included, Howard commissioned from Reynolds a consolatory caricature of an incident of his travels which he described to him.3 Before Howard left Rome Vernet had begun work on the first of his pictures and Reynolds on the caricature. Both disappointed him. But after his departure for Venice, Russel wrote on 18 March 1752, 'Upon some discourse I had with Mr Reynolds, he seemed very sorry he had lost your good graces, he has worked on your picture since and altered it much for the better'. On 6 June Russel reported to Howard at Milan that Vernet had delivered the picture and he could hardly believe it was the same as they had seen begun and now in the opinion of some 'as fine a piece as ever came from his hands'. Patch had finished his quota and Wilson was close to finishing his. On 28 August Wilson himself wrote to Howard in Paris that the pictures were finished. He begged to keep them until October for submission to the Academy of St Luke; he had not confided his aspirations to Russel, who was disconcerted by the unexplained delay. On 14 November Wilson, having delivered the pictures, wrote to Howard enclosing his bill; he had taken the liberty of throwing in a head to match the Capuchin, which he hoped Howard would forgive as it was done out of a motive of gratitude; he would write to Mr Benson, whose picture went with the others and he hoped for a good account from the Academy.  On 25 November Tyrrell, supposing his letter might find Howard in Dublin, reported the scagliola tables were ready for the voyage, 'our Tuscan Nile is navigable now'. Mulberry seeds and the gesso of Swift and another of Brutus had already been dispatched; 'the disgrazia that happen'd to the two marble busts, which you intended to make a present of to your uncle, was undoubtedly occasioned by the negligence of the Carpenter in fixing the board that shou'd have kept them assunder; but you'll justly say that Piamontini shou'd not have committed the care of them to such a Bungler'.  On 16 January 1753 Russel sent the marchese Belloni's account of monies paid to Vernet, Wilson, Chalmers and Vierpyl, and reported two cases had been sent to Jackson, Hart & Rutherfurd, merchants at Leghorn, the first containing Wilson's pictures, four copies after Vernet by Patch and the portrait by Batoni; the second 'a landskip by Vernet, S.Cecilia and Herodias by Chambers [Chalmers], the caricatura by Reynolds' with Frey's prints for Mr Benson and some music ordered from Charles Wiseman. There was news from Vernet at Marseilles; the four pictures were not forgotten: Rome had been full of English gentlemen and ladies, but when his hurry was over he would have time to set down to the Aldobrandini marriage, which he owned to having not yet begun.  There were delays in Florence also. Tyrrell wrote on 26 January, 'The Scagliolo business is a damn'd tedious piece of work in it's own nature; so that I can't blame the Monk; the tables are finished, and are fine with a witness; please God I shall despatch them away while down the Nile to our Tuscan Alexandria', where it was to be hoped they would overtake the montrous Large Parmesan cheese and two chests of Chianti waiting to sail. The Venus was in a tolerable state of forwardness, but would not be ready before May. Evidently Howard had expressed an interest in having more pictures copied because Tyrrell enclosed a list for selection, resolved to employ the same man who had copied the Van Dycks and insisting on handsome gilt frames being made for them like those he had sent away that week for Howard's compatriot, Joseph Leeson. In answer to another letter, Tyrrell wrote Howard on 12 April, 'As to what you say about the holes in the Statues and Bustoes I can't make Trabellesi believe a tittle of it; he says non e possibile; you'll be pleased to write more at large that I may be able to make him find a remedy for that disgrazia'. The final letter is dated 20 July 1753. For the first time he mentions Wilton by name: 'Wilton promises to finish the Venus next Autumn; there is a spot on her nose, for which I can find no remedy but that of the good old gentleman Job ... Vierpyl is now here for a few days; he tells me that your Apollo is quite finished; he says also your Faun will be ready about the middle of September; perhaps you may receive your three statues by the same conveyance.' Russel's final letter from Rome, 25 December 1753, confirms that the Faun had been finished and sent off with the Apollo about two months before to Leghorn, 'your statues have been extremely admired and prais'd by Gentlemen & Connoisseurs, from whence no small advantage had accru'd to Mr. Vierpyl ... As to the Nuptiae Aldobrandinae, it is but a few days that I have got leave to do it after the greatest difficulty and interest, & which I shall endeavour to finish as soon as possible'. In 1755 Matthew Brettingham mentioned in a letter to Howard a plan and elevations for the rebuilding of Shelton. Extensive alterations were made to the house in 1770 to the designs of an unidentified architect. In 1785 Vierpyl (who had been brought to Ireland by Lord Charlemont) was employed once again by Howard. He designed and built the pyramidical Wicklow family mausoleum in Kilbride churchyard, not far from Shelton.
Richard Howard came to Italy with his brother Thomas, the 8th Duke of Norfolk. They were in Rome together from October 1703 to April 1704, then in Padua and Venice, whence the Duke of Norfolk returned home on his own. Richard then settled in Rome. In 1711 'Canon Howard' called on John Bellings immediately he arrived in Rome.1 In 1712 Howard assisted Humphrey Chetham to see a Jewish baptism, and from his rooms 'opposite the Church of Minerva' Chetham and others watched 'the Cardinalls Cavalcade'.2 In 1719 'Mr Howard, Canon of St Peter's', told Alexander Forbes of Pitsligo how the Cardinals were angry at the Pretender's manner in Rome.3 'Mr Howard, a Canon of St Peter's Church' attended the birth of the Young Pretender on 31 December 1720, and 'Mr Canon Howard, Brother to the Duke of Norfolk' died in Rome on 21 August 1722.4 It was presumably to Richard Howard, and not to his great-uncle Cardinal Philip Thomas Howard (d. 1694), that Francis Drake referred c.1750: 'since the death of Cardinal Howard, about thirty years ago, the English have little interest with these scarlet priests, and prelates, who only can procure them a protection to export any curiosity of great value'.5

Captain Howard 'of the Byng galley' died in Naples on 30 September 1721 from wounds received in a duel with a Captain Hamilton in the Emperor's service; he was buried by night in the garden of the convent of S.Giovanni Carbonata (Rawlinson jnl.MSS).

Lord Howard of Effingham travelled with his governor, Gabriel Liniere. He had arrived in Genoa early in October 1702, and sailed on to Leghorn on 2 November.1 By 24 November he was in Rome, where the Duke of Shrewsbury saw him on several occasions with John Dryden and Lord Quarendon.2 Late in December he was involved in a brawl with Lord Quarendon at Frascati 'where the town rose upon them, shot a footman, and put them in danger'. He left Rome on 13 March 1703 ('Eccmo Milord Ouard' was listed in the Strada Gregoriano at Easter 1703)3 and was in Padua on 1 April.4
James Howe was 'one of the most considerable merchants of Leghorn', wrote Thomas Hollis, 'a polite and excellent man, & an old friend of mine'.1 His portrait was painted in Florence 'about 1736' (York AG),2 and Joseph Spence saw him in Leghorn in 1740.3 'Giamo Howe' signed a memorial of Englishmen living at Leghorn in March 1743.4 Between 1753 and 1758 Howe acted as Augustus Hervey's agent in Leghorn;5 he died there in 1760.6

The Duke of Shrewsbury met 'Young Mr How' and his governor in Rome between 23 February and 6 May 1704; on 17 May 1705 they all left Venice for Padua,1 where Howe remained on 19 May.2
Mr How ye rich Esq of Glocestershire of Pembroke College' was in Rome with his governor in January and February 1734.1 He was probably the Mr Howe who, with Mr Chambort (perhaps his governor), was in Florence in June 1733, proposing to spend some time there,2 and possibly the Howe whom Joseph Spence met in Florence between August 1732 and April 1733.3 Howe was among a number of English travellers who arrived in Venice from Rome in April 1734, all on their way home.4


Presumably also the 'Mr Houbert Inglesi' at Capua on 27 March 1772 (ASN CRA 1259).
Hucks was travelling with his tutor Liniere (doubtless Gabriel Liniere). They were in Padua on 7 September 1721.1 Rawlinson noted his arrival in Rome from Florence on 23 October 1721 with a Mr Glyn, and the following May he saw Hucks and Liniere in Padua which they left on 8 May for Venice.2

Thomas Huddlestone was in Padua on 24 July 1710;1 he was probably the Huddlestone whom Humphrey Chetham met with Matson in Rome in March 1712.2


Hudson left London with the sculptor Roubiliac in July 1752 to see in Italy 'the famous works of the antient masters in those parts at Rome. especially. perhaps Naples Venice & Bologna &c'. But in the event they 'returnd back to England latter end of october. their Tour of Italy very quick and their stay very little - only enough to say they have seen Rome'.1 When Reynolds was returning to England in July 1752 he met Hudson and Roubiliac at Mont Cenis on their way out2 and they travelled so rapidly that they caught up with Reynolds again in Paris, and returned with him to England (Reynolds arrived in London on 16 October 1752).3
Cosimo Hugford appears to have continued his father's trade in Florence as a watchmaker; in 1729 he exhibited in Florence pictures which he owned with his brother Ignazio Enrico.1 He was presumably the Hugford who repaired Robert Adam's watch for him in Florence in 1756.2
Ferdinando was born in Florence, the older son of Ignazio Hugford the watchmaker. In 1711 he began his novitiate as a Benedictine at the Istituto Vallombrosano; in 1723 he was moved to the monastery of S.Reparata in Marradi. There he discovered the art of scagliola painting, long practised by the lay brothers. He was made Novice Master at Vallombrosa and in 1743 became Abbot, living in the Pradisimi (the Romitorio delle Celle), where he worked his designs. Four of his panels were exhibited in Florence in 1737. By 1747 Horace Walpole was calling him 'the original Friar' and his work was in the greatest demand. He had two assistants, Pietro Belloni and Torello Mannini, but only one pupil, Lamberto Gori, with whose death in 1801 the art of scagliola painting died also. Don Enrico's portrait by Gori is in St John's College, Oxford (J. Fleming, Connoisseur, 136[1955]:106-10).
By 1683 he had been appointed Aiutante di Onore and watchmaker to the Grand Duke Cosimo III in Florence; he died there in December 1719 (Borroni 1983a, 1025. J. Fleming, Connoisseur, 136[1955]:106).
Ignazio Hugford was born in Pisa and in 1719 entered the studio of the Florentine painter Anton Domenico Gabbiani, where he remained for nine years.1 In 1726, on his master's death, he bought his collection of copies of old masters. Hugford painted several commissions for the Church, in which the influence of his brother Don Enrico was fundamental. He was elected to the Accademia del Disegno in Florence in 1729 and became provveditore from 1762 to 1772; he was also elected an honorary member of the Accademia Clementina at Bologna on 26 March 1761.2  Hugford achieved greater recognition, however, as a connoisseur and historian of art. He edited the 6th edition of Vasari's Vite in 1767-72 and illustrated the Elogi e Rittratti (degli uomini piu illustri nella Pittura, Scultura e Architettura) [1769-75]. By 1737 he was already known as a remarkable collector. Besides the conventional 17th- and 18th-century paintings, he owned several dating from before the 15th century, a period then unfamiliar.3 With his older brother Cosimo, he exhibited 139 pictures in SS.Annunziata in 1729; he contributed to the exhibition in the Accademia del Disegno in 1737 and showed 115 paintings at the Accademia in 1767.4 Joshua Reynolds discovered in 1751 that Hugford had 'a good collection of drawings, principally of the Florentine masters'; no less than 3,100 were bought for the Uffizi from his executor in 1779. Hugford also owned terracottas and wax models.  As a dealer he was (inevitably) not above suspicion; it is known he painted a 'primitive' Madonna for the collegiate church of S.Maria at Impruneta over an entirely blackened panel; he sold at a high price a weak copy as a Titian to the gullible West Indian collector William Young, and sold Henry Blundell a copy as a Veronese; a youthful self-portrait of Filippino Lippi was, apparently, faked.5 When James Martin was shown his pictures in Florence on 30 November 1763 he thought them 'much trash & but very few good ones'.6 But Hugford was also advising on distinguished collections, such as that at Dresden.7 He was a generous friend to artists; he helped Gavin Hamilton, for example, and his pupils Cipriani and Bartolozzi became established in London. In 1758 he had begun to suffer from arthritis which eventually confined him to a chair for the last twelve years of his life. When he died in Florence his reputation stood very high: 'his extraordinary, indeed unrivalled, memory', said his obituary in the Gazzetta Toscana, made him a connoisseur of such standing that 'no one in Italy could equal his skill'.
Mr Huger' was one of the 28 engraved caricatures published by Patch in 1769; he was probably the 'Hugger' recorded in Florence on 10 January 1767.
Hughes performed 'feats of horsemanship' in Florence on 22 April 1775,1 and was allowed to perform in l'Orto di Napoli in Rome for three months in the same year.2
Captain of the Somerset, he visited Venice with Captain John Evans while waiting for his convoy to be made ready;1 they travelled to Bologna with John Crewe and John Hinchliffe, who commended 'the sweetness' of Hughes.2

Sr Huges', perhaps the same person, arrived in Venice with Lady 'Newkham' [Newenham?] on 16 June 1793 and they were still there on 23 November (ASV is 769).


Hume went to Italy with his wife and fourteen-year-old daughter Amelia (1772-1837, later Bs. Farnborough). They were received in Milan, on Francis Egerton's introduction, by Alberico Barbiano di Belgioioso and the marchese Litta.1 On 13 November 1786 they arrived in Venice,2 where Hume bought from G.M. Sasso two paintings by Canaletto.3 The Humes were listed in Naples on 18 January 1787.4 Sometime in 1787 Hume bought from James Byres in Rome an album of drawings after the facade paintings in Rome by Polidoro (now in the Institut Néerlandais, Paris),5 and in Florence he acquired paintings by Annibale (Vision of St Anthony) and Lodovico Carracci (The Drinker).6
Hume, James Grant of Ballindalloch and Harry [Sir Henry] Erskine, went to Italy as aides to the special envoy in Turin, General James St Clair. He had been sent on a military embassy to the courts of both Vienna and Turin in an attempt to stiffen the resolve of Austria and Sardinia in the war of the Austrian Succession, and to bolster the faltering alliance against France. Hume's role was that of secretary and, as he put it, he 'wore the Uniform of an Officer'; he was introduced at the European courts as the General's Aide-de-Camp.1 An account of Hume's travels in northern Italy is preserved in a long letter which he wrote in journal form to his brother John.2 Hume was not over-impressed by what he saw. At Trento he recalled the famous Council of 1545-63; in Mantua he wrote 'We are now in Classic Ground; & I have kist the Earth that produc'd Virgil', but he was unimpressed by its architecture; 'nothing can be more singularly beautiful than the Plains of Lombardy, nor more beggarly & miserable than this Town [Turin]'; he pitied the poor and over-taxed inhabitants of what seemed like a land of plenty on which nature smiled. St Clair noted that the journey to Turin was vastly delayed 'by breaking of Wheels & bad Roads'. Turin, seat of the Court of the King of Sardinia, was the object of the embassy's Italian campaign; but Hume hoped and believed that he and his companions would nevertheless make 'the Tour of Italy' before their return to Britain. This was not to be, and his Italian sojourn was confined to Piedmont.  Lord Charlemont, a student in Turin at the time of Hume's visit, left an amusing record of Hume's appearance and of his activities in the city. In his incongruous scarlet uniform the corpulent philosopher resembled 'a grocer of the Trained Bands' or a 'Turtle-eating Alderman'. Hume fell hopelessly in love with the beautiful young Countess of Duvernan [?], and his infatuation was mocked by both the lady and Lord Charlemont. When sick with a high fever Hume was said to have received extreme unction from Catholic priests, a perhaps apocryphal episode which caused great amusement to those familiar with Hume's religious scepticism. In after years Hume sometimes talked of going to Italy again, with d'Alembert in the 1760s or with Mme de Boufflers, but he did not return.



Following an accident which affected his eyesight and his ability to continue his practice as a miniaturist, Humphry resolved to study oil painting in Italy.1 It was nevertheless as a miniaturist that he was to receive the greatest attention in Florence and Rome. He had been patronised by the Duke of Gloucester who had commissioned from him portraits of the Pope and the Queen of Naples and furnished introductions to Cardinal Albani and Prince Aldobrandini in Rome (HU/1/128-9, 134, 142). Several of Humphry's surviving letters from Italy are addressed to Charles Rainsford, the Duke's equerry.  Humphry travelled out with George Romney who developed a sore throat at Lyons, so that instead of crossing the Alps they sailed from Nice to Genoa. Proceeding through Leghorn and Florence, they arrived at Rome in June 1773.2 Their temperaments being so different, they did not stay together once in Italy; Humphry was socially ambitious and self-assertive ('a gossip and an idler'), while Romney was withdrawn.3 Humphry stayed in the Strada Gregoriana with the artists Alexander Day and John Nevay in 1774; he was in the Strada Felice with Nevay in 1776, and in different rooms on the same street, still with Nevay, in 1777.4 He also became a close friend of Thomas Banks and his wife. During the summer of 1773 Humphry was ill (HU/1/138) but he had been able to study the Borghese collection due to Gloucester's recommendations (HU/1/136-7). By January 1774 he was said to be 'applying closely to large portraits'5 and in the course of the year he painted a head of Mrs Banks (priv. coll. 1938). He was also determined to study the works of Raphael and Titian and he held an evening academy in his own apartment at which 'the ablest artists' discussed the copies they were making. In November 1774 he was making a full-size copy of Raphael's Transfiguration (then in the church of S.Pietro in Montorio) using the scaffolding already erected for William Parry (HU/1/138)6 and his copy of Titian's Three Graces in the Borghese was, he said, a work 'likely to do me Credit' (HU/1/141). But his reputation as a miniaturist had preceded him. In May 1774 he was providing miniatures for three snuff-boxes sent by the Duke and Duchess of Cumberland to Milan,7 and he claimed he was 'importuned by the Roman nobility' to have their portraits done in miniature. Before he left Rome the Prince Borghese gave him a gold snuff box for two miniatures he had painted. Meanwhile Humphry had tried to obtain sittings from the Pope (which only Hewetson of British artists had previously succeeded in doing) and declared he would let the Dukes of Gloucester and Dorset have a copy of the Pope's (miniature?) portrait he was to paint for the Duke of Cumberland (HU/1/140); but Clement XIV became ill and then died in September 1774 (HU/2/4) before anything had been achieved. The consequent conclave lasted until February 1775 but, through the interest of the Duke of Gloucester and Cardinal Consalvi, Humphry was allowed to continue studying the Raphaels in the Vatican. A letter to Romney from Rome on 13 January 1775 shows that Humphry knew Matthew William Peters and Thomas Jenkins and was also corresponding with John Strange, the British resident in Venice.8  Humphry spent some five weeks in Naples (he was there in late March 1775) where, despite Sir William Hamilton's help (HU/2/7), he was unable to have Titian's Danae specially placed for copying; the all-powerful minister Tanucci simply would not reply to letters.9 Humphry returned to Rome to find that Cardinals he had previously known were now out of favour with the election of the new Pope, Pius VI, and he resolved to go to Florence. At the time he left Patrick Home was trying, unsuccessfully, to find out how much he wanted for his copy of the Titian in the Borghese (presumably the Three Graces).10  In Florence Lord Cowper had obtained permission for Humphry to copy the Raphael Madonna della sedia and the Titian Venus of Urbino. Humphry was recorded copying in the Uffizi (works by Parmigianino, and self-portraits by Masaccio, Annibale Carracci, Guido Reni and Veronese) between May and July 1775; he was frequently accompanied by the young Maria Hadfield who was later to be described as his pupil.11 In 1775 Humphry painted portraits of the Fawkener brothers which were acknowledged from England on 18 December 1775 (HU/2/29). On 24 July 1775 Joseph Wright wrote to Humphry who was still in Florence.12 On 24 March 1776 he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno, Florence,13 but by then he was probably back in Rome. In June 1776 Sir Harry Fetherstonhaugh wrote to him from Florence seeking a portrait of the Countess of Albany, the Young Pretender's wife, which Humphry duly executed without mentioning his client's name. In September Humphry wrote a memorandum recalling his surprise that she appeared 'so ordinary & hagged, upon a closer examination' (HU/2/43-5). Humphry declined to paint her husband, the Young Pretender (although there is an engraved portrait of him 'from a Drawing made in Florence in 1776' by Humphry) but, persuaded by his Countess, Humphry presented the Young Pretender with a ring bearing a miniature portrait of Miss Paine (the daughter of James, the architect). In July 1776 he was intending to return to Florence for about a month to finish his copy of the Venus of Urbino and then hasten on to Venice, Turin and England. He was recorded in the Uffizi in September (when he introduced William Hadfield), and he was copying in November.14 But he was back in Rome that month, when Thomas Jones met him,15 and was still there in February and April 1777, occupied with commissions to measure antique statues and to paint the infant son of the Duke of Gloucester.  Humphry was also paying attention to an English lady, Mrs Pioggi, with a (mercenary) view of courting her younger sister when he returned to England. He left Rome, it appears, late in April, travelling with the Pope's courier to Bologna, via Loreto and Ancona; he was anxious to avoid Florence, where he had been asked to paint Lady Cowper. Venice delighted him; he wrote on 23 May 1777 that he had never seen people 'so gay, so dissipated, so contented, and so enviable' as in this 'Merry World of Water'. He visited Verona, Mantua and Parma, before travelling home across the Alps to England with Mrs Pioggi and her husband. On 9 August Humphry was being congratulated on his safe return home (HU/2/57).





On 24 July 1734 the British consul at Naples, Edward Allen, reported that the 2nd Duke of Berwick (a commander in the Spanish service) was 'lodg'd at an English Merchants Mr John Hunter, Nephew to the late consul Fleetwood, whose house was the Rendezvous of the Irish Officers, and of all the Jacobite Party in the time of the Germans, and now more than ever'.1 He was doubtless the John Hunter in Naples in 1747 acting as correspondent for Coutts bank.2


Lord Huntingdon was a 'bright exemplar of the union of a scholar with a man of the world', according to the 4th Earl of Chesterfield who took a particular interest in him (as a close friend of his son, Philip Stanhope). Huntingdon had already spent nearly four years in France and Spain before he set out from England for Italy late in 1754. Lord Chesterfield wrote to him at Turin on 24 September 1754, sending him introductions to Osorio and Nicolini.1 By December he had reached Florence, where Horace Mann welcomed him; 'he will certainly make a great figure', he told Walpole; 'he has ... that easy politeness that distinguishes those who have kept the best company ... He had learned Italian to a surprising degree of perfection in a month, and which he studies for three hours every morning, and then passes as many more with Dr Cocchi and his medals, after which he stays till past four in the Gallery, to examine the statues and busts with Wilton.'2 Domenico Bracci wrote to him from Rome in February offering his assistance, 'having heard (from my friend Dr Cocchi) of your intention of forming a collection of imperial medals'.3 The same month Robert Adam noted that the Marchesa Capponi was 'a very handsome woman and the flame of Lord Huntingdon'.4 Lord Pembroke wrote to him at Florence in February suggesting that Huntingdon was Cavaliere Servente 'to a lady with a long nose, the flower of Florentine nobility and, as I've heard, lewdness'.5 On 11 April 1755 he was elected to the the Florentine Apathistarum Accademia.6  Huntingdon was in Bologna in June about to return to Florence, and at the beginning of October he left for Rome.7 There, Stormont assumed, the Abbé Venuti would be showing him the antiquities.8 Adam met him again in Rome and was 'very genteely received' even though Huntingdon left almost immediately for Naples.9 Mann had confirmed that it was wise to spend November in Naples, 'as in all probability it would have been difficult to see that court at any other time'10 Sir James Gray duly introduced Huntingdon to the Court at Naples on 4 November.11 On 24 December he was 'daily expected' from Naples in Rome, where it appears he had already commissioned a bust of Pythagoras from Vierpyl.12 In January 1756 Thomas Steavens was recommending Thomas Patch to him,13 evidently with some success for in March Patch wrote that he hoped 'in two months to have near finished the pictures for your Lordship; they are four bridges on the Arno'.14 Huntingdon intended seeing the Carnival in Milan before leaving Italy and he was writing to Lord Chesterfield from Vienna on 23 April 1756.15 By October he was back in England.  Huntingdon was back in Italy in 1771. He was 'still' in Turin on 6 November 177116 and had left Milan for Turin on 21 February 1772; on 6 April he arrived in Florence.17 He spent the summer there, 'in great favour at Court', attending the Great Duchess pending the birth of her son Leopold (on 14 August).18 In October he went to Mantua to see the Archduke and Archduchess (Ferdinand and Maria d'Este); in November he was in Bologna where he took a house for six months, promising the Grand Duke he would return to Florence for the Carnival.19 He was in Venice in July 1773 and Milan in August, awaiting the arrival of the Rawdon boys (see Francis Rawdon). 'The innumerable civilities' he had everywhere encountered made him 'prolong my stay in every place beyond my original intentions: instead of three weeks I staid three months at Venice; & had I not the excuse of going to place my Nephews at Turin, I do not know how I should decline the flattering importunities of the Archduke & Archduchess to pass the winter at Milan. I foresee my return to England is yet distant.'20 On 19 November 1773 Huntingdon arrived with his two nephews in Parma and lodged in the same house as Lady Mary Coke. They left on 24 November for Florence, where Huntingdon fell out with Lady Coke 'beyond all accommodation' (not a difficult thing to achieve at that time) and had left by 11 December for Rome.21 Huntingdon had arrived at Naples with one nephew by 11 January 1774, proposing, said Sir William Hamilton, to 'pass at least a year in this city'.22 He left on 25 October.23
Known and admired for his learning and politeness and bravery, but with an alloy of vices which derogated very much from his character' (CP), he was first in Italy as Lord Hastings in 1700-1. In December 1700 he was in Rome, staying some weeks, having come from Malta;1 he was in Padua in March 1701,2 and had returned to London by June when he succeeded as 8th Earl of Huntingdon.  After serving under Marlborough he 'quitted his regiment', wrote the Duke of Shrewsbury, 'I know not, whether from any disgust, or the inconstancy of his own temper',3 and came again to Italy. On 14 July 1703 he was said to be talking of going to Venice 'next week',4 and while there he was at one stage procuring catamites.5 Late in October he passed through Florence on his way to Lucca 'where he designs staying some time',6 but he had arrived in Rome on 13 January 1704.7 He was still there on 13 February, playing whisk all day with the Duke of Shrewsbury, and Lords Quarendon and Cardigan.7 He left on 18 April 'in order to go to Leghorn and Genoa, and thence to Turin, where he designs to make a considerable stay, if he does not alter his mind'.3 He was in Leghorn on 29 April,8 and by 31 May had arrived in Turin9 where he stayed until after September.10
The 9th Earl of Huntingdon was a good linguist and classical scholar, 'of good Address, of a slow lisping speech, a thin, small, fair complexion ... and something of a Libertine'.1 He passed through Leghorn on his way to Rome in May 1720.2 From Rome he went to Venice, arriving in mid-November and intending to stay for all the Carnival; he had with him 'a Scotch Gentleman whose name is Lynn',3 presumably the Alexander Lind who with Owen Swiney was with Huntingdon in Padua on 24 June 1721.4 Huntingdon left Florence on 11 November 1721 for Venice, apparently for a second visit.5 By the spring of 1722 he had met in Florence Antonio Cocchi, the renowned physician and antiquary, then still a young man, whom he took as his guest on tour from Bolzano through Germany and France to England. Cocchi stayed with Huntingdon in London but, finding his host somewhat mean, left to practise as a doctor in London before returning to Tuscany in 1726.6
Lord Huntingtower travelled in 1726 with a Dutch tutor, the Rev. Gaspar Wetstein. His grandfather wanted him to see 'only Kings and Princes', and he was duly introduced at Court in Turin, but his grandfather also berated his extravagance.1 In Venice in 1727 the 4th Earl of Dysart (as Huntingtower had just become) sat to Rosalba Carriera,2 and twice to Nazari in 1728.3
As a Catholic nobleman Huntly received distinguished attention in the course of his two visits to Italy. On his first visit, as Lord Huntly, the Grand Duke Cosimo de Medici asked him in Florence 'when he left his court, to give him the compliment of the name of the first son he should have'.1 Pope Clement XI sent him his portrait and other presents 'of great value'; Huntly had shared an audience with the 8th Duke of Norfolk on 'about' 9 November, when both wore hats and swords; Huntly took his leave of the Pope on 10 December.2 He had arrived in Rome by 17 October and left on 12 December.3 He arrived in Venice on 15 May 1704 and Hugh Broughton reported on 23 May that he would be leaving for Vienna 'next week'.4  As Duke of Gordon he made a second visit to Italy in 1717. He was in Genoa late in October and left with Colonel (the Hon. George) Carpenter on 1 November by felucca for Leghorn;5 it was thought odd in Jacobite circles that Gordon should carry 'young Carpenter about everywhere with him', see George Carpenter. On 26 November Gordon was reported to be in Bologna.6 In Florence he again met the Grand Duke, to whom he presented a self-portrait by Medina and, more curiously, left one of his highland footmen, Donald MacPherson. It was also on this visit that the Duke of Gordon commissioned the marble bust of the Grand Duke from Foggini (now VAM).7 The Grand Duke later gave his godson Cosmo Gordon (b. 1721, later 3rd Duke of Gordon), 'a silver fount for his christening, and a very fine suit of steel armour gilt'.1

Hurleston went to Italy with his master, Joseph Wright of Derby, Mrs Wright and John Downman. They reached Rome on 3 February 1774, Hurleston's arrival being listed by Hayward with that of Downman.1 He was in Florence copying in the Uffizi in November 1775 and January 1776,2 but on 24 February 1776 Maria Hadfield told Ozias Humphry that 'Mr Houlston' had been unable to get permission to copy Titian's Venus.3 On 27 November 1776, after Wright had returned to England, Hurlestone was in Rome.4 Four figure studies by him, including a copy from Raphael's Jupiter embracing Cupid in the Farnesina, were in an album inscribed 'J. Wright & Richd. Hurleston's (his pupil) Drawings ... when on Italian Travels' (Sotheby's, 20 Jul. 1966).


Hussey came of a Catholic family and for five years had been educated in France.1 He went to Italy in the winter of 1729-30 with Vincenzo Damini, under whom he had studied painting in England for some four years. On their arrival in Bologna it was alleged that Damini 'tricked the young artist out of his money, and most of his clothes, and left him in a very deplorable condition'; for three months he endured 'with a poor kind widow' and was then helped by a Venetian 'ambassador' who had witnessed the original agreement between Damini and Hussey. In 1731 and 1732 he gained drawing prizes at the Accademia di Belle Arti in Bologna (Apollo guarding the flocks of Admetus is preserved at the Academy). An album of 24 studies from paintings by Lodovico Carracci and Guido Reni in the church of S.Michele in Bosco, near Bologna, is in the BMPL. Towards the end of 1732 he moved to Rome, by then the pupil of Ercole Lelli, painter, sculptor and engraver, who had accepted Hussey as a friend, rather than a pupil. They were to return to Bologna in May 1734 when Walter Bowman met them, and asserted that Hussey 'since Raphael is allowed the greatest master of drawing'.2  In Rome Hussey spent most of his time drawing and he acquired a considerable reputation; in 1734 Sir John Evelyn read a letter to the Society of Antiquaries in London saying that 'one Hussey, a Dorsetshire Gentleman was the Most Celebrated Master in Drawing' in Rome,3 and in 1735 his father wrote that Giles 'is in very good reputation at Rome & is expected to prove ye greatest painter of ye age he is allowd alredy to be the best drawer'. Hussey met Button (a pupil of Sebastiano Conca), with whom he studied anatomy, ancient statues and bas-reliefs. He drew the Pretender and his son Charles Edward,4 and evidently mixed in Jacobite circles (in 1792 John Udny gave Sir William Forbes three drawings by him of the Pretender 'done at different periods of life').5 Vertue suggested he also visited Naples and Venice. According to Walpole, Hussey was just beginning to colour (i.e. paint) when his father died (4 June 1736), leaving nothing to his son. Money for Hussey's journey home was then raised by Hugh Smithson (later Duke of Northumberland) and other Englishmen at Rome.6 Hussey subsequently executed a number of commissions for Northumberland which remain at Syon House, but he was never very productive. He grew obsessed with theories of beauty and became a recluse. 'Seventy-two elegant high-finished Drawings by that much esteemed Artist Mr Hussey' were sold in 1787 (Christie's, 1 May); see Michael Bray.
He was in Rome with young Mr Webb, 'a roman Catholic gentleman of great fortune' in 1782; they had left for Florence by 8 May.1 In 1798 Hussey had an audience with the Pope (DNB).


A Presbyterian weaver (or tailor) from Ireland, he announced that he had come to Rome by God's command to convert the Pope; he 'preached mightily against statues, pictures, umbrellas, bag-wigs, and hoop-petticoats', before being persuaded to return home (Russel, Letters, 1:203; 3 Jan. 1743).
He was copying in the Uffizi in 1775 and in Sept.-Oct. 1776 (Borroni 1987, 93, 98, 113, 134-5).
He was presumably the Hutchinson, merchant at Naples, mentioned by Stephen Riou in March 1753 (Riou MSS, 7 Mar. 1753).

Hyde was in Florence in February 1784,1 and was seen among a large party at the Villa Madama on 21 April.2



Ingleby arrived in Rome in December 1728 at the same time as Matthew Wise, Robert Bayspoole, [Charles] Lock and John, Lord Hervey; he left for Venice on 15 May 1729 with the Freeman brothers, Wise and Field (SP 85/16, ff.480, 538; Walton, 16 Dec. 1728, 19 May 1729).
His visit to Padua in April 1703 ('Jo:Inglis Scotus') was his third,1 and that of 1705 his fourth.2 His medallion portrait was modelled by Massimiliano Soldani at Florence in 1703.3 He may be identified as the 'Mr English' who was with William, Viscount Villiers (who also sat to Soldani) at Rome in February 1702,4 and the 'Mr English' with 'Mr Carr' [William Ker] who, on 8 November 1704, visited the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome, and on 24 January 1705 was about to leave Rome for Naples.5
James Ingoldesby visited Luti's studio in Rome with Rawlinson and William Parker on 29 July 1724; he was presumably the 'Mr Ingleby' whom Rawlinson said was leaving Rome on 10 August, bound for Leghorn (Rawlinson jnl.MSS).
Ingram came to own many paintings by Francesco Guardi (d. 1793) which he is alleged to have commissioned from the artist. He was conceivably one of the unidentified Ingrams in Venice in 1791-3 (see below), but he is not certainly recorded in Venice until 1819 (when he was allowed to remove his Guardis from the city); in 1822 he was staying with his family at Rome in the Palazzo Mignanelli (F. Haskell, JWCI, 23[1960]:271).
Presumably also the Ingram recorded in Florence on 9 April 1774 with 'Borduvi'[?] and on 2 July with a Mr Gordon (Gazz.Tosc.).


Robert Scott stayed with 'Mr Innes' a Tailor, in Rome in May 1787;1 Innis, the English tailor and his wife, dined with the Flaxmans at Frascati on 4 October 1788.2
Irby arrived in Venice on 14 September 1770 with George and John Sargent,1 and was in Florence the following February, when he was recommended to William Hamilton in Naples as 'a favourite of all who love modesty & good nature'.2 He was back in Florence at the beginning of May 1771.3
Tutor to George Wright, the sickly son of James Wright, he was noticed in Pisa in December 1790,1 and in Florence in September 1792.2
Iremonger travelled with his half-brother Benjamin Lethieullier, and their paths sometimes crossed those of Sir Matthew and Lady Fetherstonhaugh, his half-sister and brother-in-law. They spent over two years in Italy where they commissioned pictures from Batoni and Joseph Vernet, and became part of Lord Charlemont's lively set at Rome. It was, presumably, an indication of familiarity when Charlemont made a (characteristic) wager at Lucca on 26 September 1751 that Iremonger would live longer than General d'Olloune, the Polish amabassador at Turin.1 Both were in Rome in 1750, when Lethieullier commissioned a set of four Times of Day and two river landscapes from Vernet for completion in April 1751 (all at Uppark) and Iremonger bought 'un petit tableau' from Vernet in 1751.2 Both Iremonger and Lethieullier appear in Reynolds's Parody of the School of Athens (NGI) painted at Rome in 1751, and Iremonger sat to Batoni for the first of his two portraits, dated 1751 (Uppark; Clark/Bowron 160). Lethieullier was writing to Lord Charlemont from Rome on 12 April 1751.3  Lethieullier and Iremonger were listed in Venice from 2 July to 4 September 1751,4 and they are next recorded arriving back in Rome on 18 March 1752.5 Lethieullier commissioned two more pictures from Vernet in 1752 for Sir Matthew Fetherstonhaugh,6 and both were listed among the sponsors of Charlemont's Roman academy for British artists7 (see Charlemont). Batoni painted a second, similar, portrait of Iremonger in 1752 (destroyed 1989; Clark/Bowron 163) and Lethieullier also sat to Batoni, both on his own (Uppark) and with his sister (priv. coll.) [Clark/Bowron 161-2]. In June 1752 James Russel described having lately attended a party from Rome which included Lethieullier and Iremonger 'to Tivoli, Palestrina, Antium etc.', adding that the group were 'at present in Naples'.8 Lethieullier and Iremonger had passed through Capua on 23 May 17529 on their way to Naples. On 22 July Iremonger wrote to Sir Roger Newdigate from Naples, sending his brother's compliments and describing a visit to Paestum (which he calls Pista); he intended, he wrote, to return to Rome the following week and to proceed to Siena via Perugia. The letter also shows Iremonger to have been something of a classicist (he transcribes a Latin inscription and talks of his growing collection of medals).10 By January 1753 Lethieullier was in Genoa,11 and in August Letheuillier and Iremonger were reported to be in Vienna, intending to be home by the winter.12

"James Irvine went to Italy as a young history painter, but it was as a picture dealer that he was to make his mark. He was in Italy from 1780 to 1791 (apart from a brief visit to London after April and until November 17881) and he returned to Rome for four months in 1797-8. His experiences were described in letters to the artist-dilettante George Cumberland, the first dated Rome, 15 July 1780.2  It was with Cumberland in Rome that Henry Quin went in 1786 to meet 'a Painter, a young Scotsman, who has been here 7 years - His name is Irwin, a very decent modest young Man who seems to colour very well; and now-adays that is a very material point'.3 He was possibly the 'Irwin' who with John Richmond Smyth embarked in November 1780 from Venice to visit 'the East', but was subsequently forced to return, the boat being unseaworthy,4 and he was doubtless the 'Irwin' whom John Ramsay met several times in Rome between 24 December 1782 and 1 March 1783.5 James Irvine was listed in Rome living with the engraver Domenico Cunego in the Campo Marzo in 1784, at the Piazza Mignanelli in 1785, 1787 and 1788,6 and on the Via Babuino in 1790 (Rome List 1790). Letters written from Parma suggest he was staying there between October 1787 and April 1788, presumably with Sir John Irwin with whom he was hoping to travel to Florence and Naples, but Sir John died in May 1788. None of Irvine's paintings survives, and his references to his own work furnish little evidence. His enthusiasm for Gavin Hamilton 'the first historical painter of the present age' (10 Feb. 1781), and his attention to the antique, suggest historical ambitions. In September 1781 he was preparing for Cumberland 'outlines or tracings of the principal bass reliefs here' (12 Sep.); in 1782 he was working very little 'in this bad weather, but what I do is chiefly from the Antique, & at night I go to an academy we have in Pars' house' (2 Mar.). In 1787 he showed at the RA a Ganymede, doubtless executed in Rome, but cited an address as London (his letters show he was in Bologna in March and Parma in October that year). In 1789 in Florence he was allowed to take down 'from the ""green room""' the Titian Venus, which he thought as good as that in the Tribuna; his copy of it was advancing in June (31 Mar., 13 Jun.).7 In 1790 he was painting the 'figure of a muse, size of life with a landscape background' which, with an Endymion, he meant to finish by the winter (3 Sep.), but in November 1790 he said he had been to Castel Gandolfo for the 'greatest part of Octr and made some studies from nature' (13 Nov.).  Irvine wrote at length about his British colleagues in Rome (and many of his observations will be found in other entries). In 1780 he said that at Rome 'there is very little encouragement: there are some English here at present but they will scarce go to see an Artist for fear they should be expected to bespeak something' (16 Dec.). In 1784 he wrote of his disgust with Rome and his compatriots there (21 Jul.); the following year he wrote that 'our Countrymen are divided into two parties equally prejudic'd: the one in favour of England, the other of Italy. The newcomers relish nothing that is not English: Others again have been so long out of their own country that they hardly know what it is & as they are settled here & have little prospect of returning home except it be just to die, they seem to have endeavour'd to create in themselves a contempt for their own country & an admiration of this ... there are furious disputes between the parties ... you cannot imagine what absurdities are advanced in support of each side' (7 Jan. 1785). The British colony was never completely harmonious, and when in 1790 Cumberland sent him criticism from London, Irvine at once proposed 'a combination to vindicate ourselves from the aspersions of our enemies by each undertaking and executing a work of some consequence and so contrive it that they may all be sent to the exhibition together to make the stronger impression and show that we have not totally mispent our time here - such a scheme, I think, would do us more honour than splitting into parties and abusing one another'. A club in Rome had been proposed though 'whether this will take effect or, if it does, whether it will last is rather doubtful'; Irvine added, a little ingenuously, that Head had told the 4th Earl of Bristol 'that all the English Artists in Roam were most infamously debauched' (13 Nov. 1790). Like so many British artists in Rome, Irvine always had an eye on the art market. In 1782 he was regretting he could not afford an equestrian portrait by van Dyck which Gavin Hamilton had got from Venice (15 May). Five years later he was definitely buying pictures for himself and, presumably, Cumberland, who twice advanced him sums of £300, once in Parma,8 and once in Venice, the second time in order to buy pictures for himself and not for sale (29 Jan. 1789). In September 1790 Irvine referred to 'the collection' that he was making with George Manley; they had made great acquisitions 'which we have hung up and fill five rooms, yet have not room enough so we make a most magnificent show' (3 Sep.).  Irvine returned to England in 1791 for some six years, during which his ambitions as a dealer developed further. The collection he had formed in Rome with Manley was sold at Christie's on 24 March 1792, though it proved to be 'a very unlucky speculation',9 and he was invited to act as the London agent for Robert Fagan and Charles Grignion. He was briefly back in Rome in December 1797 as the French armies were approaching (16 Dec.), and was about to return the following April, when he told Cumberland that 'our colony here is dwindled away much and consists now of only a few old standards that are not easily transplanted' (28 Apr. 1798). This visit was apparently taken up with the purchase of pictures, for Irvine mentioned in December 1799 pictures still in Leghorn belonging to 'a Roman & Mrs I.' which were due to have been sent back to London in November 1798; the Mrs I. was his wife, who is mentioned in subsequent letters.10  In May 1800 Irvine was thinking of going back to Italy 'to try what can be done either in the way of painting or picture dealing'.11 His consequent productive visits to Rome and Genoa (1800-6), when he established his reputation as a picture dealer, fall outside the scope of this Dictionary and have been published elsewhere, see Buchanan, Memoirs, 2:, and Brigstocke, Buchanan."
Mr Irvine, a gentleman who has passed much time in the West Indies, and who is endeavouring to establish his health in a climate between the extremities of 18 degrees and 51', was introduced by Richard Phelps in Turin1 to Horace Mann in Florence in October 1762. He was probably the Irvine who in March 1763 was suffering from 'Rheumatick pains & a violent cold' in Rome,2 and the Irvine who commissioned a copy of the Madonna della sedia from George Willison in Rome.
Lord Irwin embarked on his grand tour with his German tutor John Haccius (b. c.1664), his younger brother Rich and Thomas Worsley (1686-1750) of Hovingham.1 The original plan was for the whole party to travel to Holland and study at the University of Leiden. Although Irwin and his three companions enrolled on 11 September 1704, he and Haccius had to flee the country after becoming embroiled in a duel. Having left his brother and Worsley in Holland, Irwin continued on his journey to Italy, secretly accompanied by his tutor who had been dismissed from service by Irwin's trustees on account of the duel. After visiting the Elector's Court in Dusseldorf, Irwin travelled on via Cologne and Augsburg into Italy. Once he entered Italy, his trustees paid funds by means of the banker, Thomas Palmer of Broad Street, London, and his agents, Messrs. Williams in Venice. The chief topic of Irwin's letters was to be the shortage of funds. In Rome he complained that he was 'much inferior in everything than Mr Boucher [John Bourchier], who has tho' but a Gentleman, a greater allowance' (5 Dec. 1705). He resolved to move on to 'little Towns fitted to my allowance', and after spending barely two months in Rome, he left for Siena. In Lucca, where he spent six months, he commissioned Giuseppe Montuoli (1667-1739) to compose romantic cantatas for him,2 and he wrote to his mother about the possibility of bringing home a 'pretty Italian Lady Irwin who would charm you by the sweetness of her manners and language'. He later mentioned the 3rd Earl of Cardigan, who 'according to the custom of Venice, keeps a mistress, tho' very ugly and old, and has quartered for several years all comers and goers'. In December 1706 Irwin at last became responsible for his own finances. The last six months of his stay were spent in Venice 'making a commotion at Balls and at feasts' along with his friends Richard Lumley and the Earl of Dorset (according to Blathwayt's governor, de Blainville). From Venice Irwin wrote about the 'good opportunity of furnishing my great rambling house with excellent paintings', probably referring to the group of about thirty paintings by Antonio Marini (seascapes, landscapes and battles, as well as a Self-Portrait) of which eighteen remain at Temple Newsam. In the summer of 1707 Irwin commenced his journey home, and he was back in England by October. Haccius remained in Italy until the end of the year, and then accompanied the consignment of pictures to Rotterdam, where he placed the boxes of rolled-up canvases aboard a ship bound for Hull.
"His christian name is sometimes given as John,1 though the parish registers called him 'Giaco.', and he appears in the records of the Jacobite Lodge in Rome as 'Dr James Irvin'.2 One of the best-known doctors in Rome in the middle of the century, he had arrived by 1732, when he was living with his wife ('Madalena' or 'Manzin') in the Strada Gregoriana.3 From 1738 until 1743 the parish registers described him as Medico del Re, but he had been one of the Pretender's physicians at least since 1736, and he was to remain in the Stuart service until his death in 1759. He nevertheless mixed also in non-Jacobite circles. 'The best Whigs go to see him', said Robert Adam, 'so that it is no stain and he is so sensible as not to say or do anything to offend them'. Adam, who had cause to consult him in 1757, found him 'a very sensible, clever old man of near eighty years [parish registers give his age as 70 in 1757] who every day drinks his four or five bottles of wine, has a flow of spirits meet for forty years and does not look sixty',4 and James Tyrrell described Irwin to Ralph Howard as 'the jolly doctor'.5 He sat to Dupra in Rome in 1739 (SNPG), one of a series of Jacobite portraits by that artist, and he appears in Reynolds's Parody of the School of Athens of 1751 (NGI). From 1755 the Irwins looked after the infant daughter of William Chambers, and Mrs Irwin brought her back to England in May 1759. Irwin had died on 28 February 1759.6 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu said that the day before he took 'a bowl of punch with some Englishmen ... and told them with a firm tone of Voice: ""by G he was going""'.7"
In some financial difficulty at the end of his distinguished but extravagant career, Sir John resigned his parliamentary seat in April 1783 and retired abroad, first to Normandy then to Parma in Italy.1 He is said to have enjoyed the friendship of the Duke of Parma and to have kept open house for all English visitors; in April 1788 James Irvine said he was hoping to go to Naples with Sir John and Lady Irvine [sic],2 but Irwin died at Parma the following month; his burial service was read by an English gentleman.
Justinian Isham was educated in Holland and had travelled in Germany at the beginning of the century. In 1719, out of favour at Court as a Tory and a suspected Jacobite, he travelled again with his cousin, Edmund Turnor. They came through France and reached Genoa in October 1719.1 They spent three months in Rome. Isham's father had warned him that it would 'require a good deal of caution how you behave yourself' in relation to the Pretender, and later he wrote to his son in Rome that he was sorry 'there was a Person there, that must make it pretty difficult how you manage in that respect'. Isham went on to visit Naples, where he climbed Vesuvius on 4 April, but he was back in Rome for Holy Week. At Easter 1720 a 'Cavalr de Tornor', possibly Edmund Turnor, was lodging in the parish of S.Lorenzo in Lucina.2 Isham was in Venice for Ascension Day and they were both in Padua on 25 May 1720.3

Possibly also the Ivory who delivered a letter from William Hamilton in Naples to Cardinal de Bernis in Rome in November 1786 (Add. 51315, f.26).
Izard had been living with his wife in London before they made a tour of Italy in 1774-5. They passed through Dijon and Geneva in July and August 1774 and by mid-October they were in Florence,1 where Izard sought out his compatriot J.S. Copley.2 In November they were in Rome and the following January in Naples. From Naples they took Copley on an excursion to Paestum ('stayed at Paestum 3 hours, and got back to Naples in three days', Copley wrote3); they also covered Copley's expenses back to Rome. Izard had written from Naples on 17 January that 'we shall return to Rome in two or three weeks, and intend staying there till the middle of March, when we shall set out for Venice, and so to England, through Germany'. Their stay was curtailed by the deterioration of Anglo-American relations, and on 21 January 1775 he wrote again from Naples that he would endeavour 'to get to England as early as possible in the spring'. There was time in Rome for them both to sit to Copley for a double portrait (MFA Boston), and Copley copied for them a Raphael Madonna in Florence.3 They were leaving Rome in 'a few days' on 2 March, and were back in London by 25 May 1775. Izard subsequently thanked John Strange, the British resident in Venice, for his hospitality and mentioned that he had visited Verona.4
His monument in Leghorn, erected by his wife and three sons Prosper, Peter and Frederick William, described him as having been consul at Genoa for two years 'after which he returned to Leghorn his former residence whence he carried on for about 50 years an extensive & successful Commerce. He dyed at Ancona the 23rd of November In the 72nd Year of his Age'.1 Another source gives his date of death as 5 December 1763, aged 71 years, 8 months and 9 days.2 Lord John Hervey had been attended by 'George Jackson, the British Consul' at Genoa in August 1729, and Horace Walpole later described Hervey (who d. 1743) as Jackson's patron,3 but Jackson seems officially to have taken up that post only in December 1737,4 remaining there until 1741.5 Lady Grisell Baillie commended him in 1740 as 'an honest, civil, good natur'd man'.6 Horace Mann commented in September 1741 that Jackson of Leghorn 'being concerned in commerce' was 'very attentive' to Jacobite manoeuvres.7 In 1742 Jackson was vainly trying to succeed as British representative at Leghorn.8 A Protestant, he had married an Italian Catholic lady, having obtained special dispensation from Cardinal Lambertini who acted as godfather to the Jackson's oldest son; in 1740 Lambertini became Pope Benedict XIV, and by 1746 had already given the son 'a good benefice'.9 Jackson's merchant business was run in partnership with Diharce (1736-44), Hart (1737-44), and Rutherfurd (-1753-).10  Jackson was well-known as a bibliophile and in 1756 published a catalogue of his library, Catalogus Librorum Italicorum, Latinorum, et Manuscriptorum, magno sumptu, et labore per triginta annorum spatium Liburni Collectorum; it listed 3000 books and 215 manuscripts, and an appendix of 1762 added 71 books and 40 manuscripts. The catalogues represented an attempt to sell the library, which passed to his eldest son, Prosper, who sold it in 1775 to the duc de la Vallière (now Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal, Paris).11 Jackson died in Ancona where his daughter Giovanna was a nun.11


Jackson had worked for five years in Paris before going to Italy. In 1731 he arrived in Venice, where he resided until 1745. He met A.M. Zanetti, the Italian wood-engraver and collector, and was befriended by Joseph Smith. In 1738 Jackson engraved two works from Smith's collection, the success of which led Smith to propose in 1739 an album of chiaroscuro prints after some of the larger pictures in public buildings and churches in Venice. Twenty-four subjects were published in 1745 as 'opera selectiora a Joanne Baptista Jackson, Anglo, ligno coelata et coloribus adumbrata' [Venice, G.B. Pasquali], the plates bearing dedications to Joseph Smith and Smith's distinguished friends. Jackson also engraved six gouache landscapes by Marco Ricci, using six or seven blocks, a project completed in 1744. Neither of these publications brought financial success, and Jackson returned to London in 1745. His pupil, Felice Polenzani, later practised in Rome. Jackson's Enquiry into the Origin of Printing [1752] contains some account of his work in Venice (J. Kainen, J.B. Jackson, [1962]. B. Rix, Jackson, The Venetian Set, exh. cat. Ontario 1983).

Mr Dick Jackson of Magdalene, Oxford' was noticed in Rome by Richard Pococke on 6 February 17411 and at the same time by Joseph Spence.2
He was in Padua on 14 February 1719,1 and on 29 July 1719 Rawlinson found the name of St:Jackson 171[8 or 9] scratched at the entrance to the Catacombs in the church of S.Gennaro in Naples.2
Jackson was secretary to John Trevor in Munich 1780-2 and again in Turin 1783-96. He acted as chargé d'affaires during Trevor's absences in July-October 1785, February 1787-October 1788 and July-October 1789.1 In the first of these periods Jackson's father came to visit him in Turin, see William Jackson. After Trevor's departure Jackson was again in charge, from 6 May 1797 to 11 December 1798, when he returned to England following the French invasion. Diplomatic relations were suspended in 1798- 9, but on 1 September 1799 Jackson returned to Turin as minister plenipotentiary; he left on 4 November and arrived in Florence on 10 November, where the King and Queen of Naples were in exile. He returned to Turin on 18 December 1799 and withdrew with the Sardinian court on 1 June 1800. They arrived in Rome on 9 October 1800 and were in Naples from 2 June 1801-3 August 1802. Jackson left Rome for England in February 1806.2  Thomas Brand met Jackson in Turin in February 1787 and described him to Robert Wharton; there was in him a 'tendency to greatness', but he was a friend with whom Brand 'often [had] a string quartett of Haydn or quintett of Bocherini'; Jackson was 'an excellent Base player & has great skill on the Piano forte, at all which as well as the Coxcomical shades of his Character you will wonder the less when I tell you he is son to Mr Jackson of Exeter'.3 Jackson was also an amateur artist, and an album of some sixty of his wash drawings, made mostly in the neighbourhood of Turin and dated between 1791 and 1794, was sold in 1988 (Christie's, 19 Jul.).
In July 1785 he embarked on a four-month tour on the Continent which included a two-week visit to Turin in September. He doubtless went to see his son Thomas (secretary at the British legation) who, however, is not mentioned in the brief published description from his autobiography (Leisure Hour, Sep. 1882, 569-70. See also J. Hayes, Connoisseur, 173[1970]: 17-24).

He was secretary to Lord Mountstuart, the British envoy in Turin 1779-83, and acted as chargé d'affaires between March and September 1783, when he returned to England (Horn, 1:126-7). See also Donald Campbell.
Jacob returned to Rome from Naples on 18 January 1729 with Lord Carmichael, Captain Hering and a Mr Abercromby.1 He is said to have visited the chief towns of Italy, and his 'Letter from Paris to R.B.' describes some of his travels (DNB).
Following the failure of the 1715 rebellion in Scotland, James had returned to the exiled Stuart Court at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, but British diplomatic pressure soon compelled him to leave. He accept an invitation to Rome from Pope Clement XI who welcomed him as a Catholic claimant to the English throne and made him an annual allowance. On his arrival in Rome in March 1717 James stayed in the Palazzo Gualterio, before moving in July to the Palazzo Ducale in Urbino. In March 1719 he went to Spain to witness the start of the abortive Jacobite expedition to Scotland, contrived by the Spanish minister Cardinal Alberoni. He had returned to Italy by June when he met his bride, the eighteen-year-old Polish Princess Clementina Sobieska, in Viterbo; he had already been betrothed by proxy at Bologna on 9 May, see James Murray. Following their marriage at Montefiascone on 2 September 1719 they returned to Rome,1 James alleging that she combined the loveliness of seventeen with the sound sense and discrimination of thirty.2 The Pope acknowledged James and Clementina as reigning sovereigns and gave them the Palazzo Muti (on the Piazza SS.Apostoli), with the Palazzo Savelli at Albano as a summer residence. Their first son Charles was born on 31 December 1720. The Jacobite court soon settled into an annual routine: a grand reception on New Year's Eve to mark Prince Charles's birthday, a special mass on St George's Day at SS.Apostoli, and a formal visit from James to the Pope each May before his court retired to Albano for the summer; concerts at the Palazzo were widely attended. The Jacobite cause remained attractive in the 1720s as disaffection grew in Britain with Walpole's whig government and the Hanoverian George I. For the British traveller James was a fascinating presence in Rome, but for the British government he remained a threat. Since Britain had no formal diplomatic relationship with the Vatican, Whitehall used unofficial agents in Italy, of whom the most influential were Cardinal Alessandro Albani and the Prussian antiquarian Baron Philip von Stosch (whose diplomatic correspondence was conducted in French under the pseudonym of John Walton). The death of George I in 1727 appeared to provide James with another opportunity to assert his claims, and he departed for Avignon and Lorraine, only to be recalled by the Pope who feared British reaction.  James rejoined Clementina in Bologna in January 1728, staying in the Palazzo Vizzani,3 but their marriage was by now proving difficult. Following the birth of their second son, Henry, on 6 March 1725, the now querulous Clementina had retreated to the Ursuline convent of S.Cecilia, returning only after James had agreed to dismiss Colonel John Hay, his very competent, but Protestant, secretary of state. Her life was now devoted to piety, but her fasting and inactivity brought on her early death in Rome in 1735. Thereupon James developed a contrite piety of his own, and his relationships with his sons, particularly Charles, became brittle. Cunningham described him in 1736 as 'a tall, thin, raw-boned man with a sallow complexion and a pretty high nose, with a strong likeness of all the Stuart Family, though upon other occasions we observed him have a melancholy cast'.4 Thomas Gray called him 'a thin ill-made man, extremely tall and aukward, of a most unpromising countenance, a good deal resembling King James the Second [with] extremely the air and look of an idiot, particularly when he laughs or prays'.5  James appeared less in public, spending much of his time at Albano; the failure of his son's expedition to Scotland in 1745, the final Jacobite offensive, seems not to have surprised him. He was occasionally seen in his box at the opera in Rome, and in 1758 and 1762 he attended the annual prize-giving ceremonies at the Accademia di S.Luca.6 He died in Rome on 1 January 1766 and was accorded a state funeral by the Pope; he was buried in St Peter's. In 1718 James had appointed Antonio David as his painter; he was also painted by Trevisani in 1720 (Holyrood) by Girolamo Pesci in 1721 (Bodleian Library, Oxford),7 and by Torelli in 1727.8 Of his later portraits he sat to Liotard in 1737 (SNPG) and there is a drawing by Francesco Ponzone of c.1741.8
George James was first recorded in Italy at Naples in May 1755.1 He is next mentioned in Rome in 1758 as the friend of Jonathan Skelton, in whose letters his name recurs between 11 January and 20 July.2 James wrote to Skelton's patron, William Herring, from Rome on 25 October 1758, mentioning that he had once been 'laid under the suspicion for some days of being a spy from a mistake that my name was Jinkins [Jenkins]'. On 24 January 1759 James wrote to Herring describing Skelton's death in Rome. Hayward recorded him in Rome in February 1759 and said he left on 27 June 1760 with Biagio Rebecca.3 Mrs Piozzi later wrote that James loved 'profligate conversation dearly' and like Horace Mann was a 'Finger-Twirler' ('meaning a decent word for Sodomites').4 In 1762 James exhibited four Italian subjects (two figures and two views) at the SA.
Mr Horton James' witnessed Lady Mary Wortley Montagu's will in Venice late in March 1761.1 John Murray gave Mr James, 'an aimiable young gentleman', a letter of introduction to Horace Mann in Florence dated 15 August 1761.2 During the winter he appears to have been in Naples; Robert Strange recalled meeting him there (and discusssing the Perseus and Andromeda recently bought by Lord Fordwich [later 3rd Earl Cowper]).3 He was in Rome on 25 March 1762, when he signed a document ('H. James') supporting J.T. Needham's controversial views on the interpretation of hieroglyphics;4 with Lord Tavistock and Edmund Rolfe, he had sponsored Needham's studies.5 He may also have been the Mr James who sat to Blanchet in Rome in 1760.6
John James had arrived in Naples from Rome c.1788; he lived at Grenatello 1788-90, Torre del Greco in 1791, Naples in 1792-3 and Sorrento in 1793-5. In July 1795 he moved to S.Pietro Paterno, where his relative Maria Newman died on 31 October, leaving three orphans in his care. In the course of these moves some of his effects had been impounded and he was accused of smuggling, as a result of which he appealed to Sir William Hamilton, on 26 March 1795 and 7 July 1797 (ASN E 674).
J. James' was in Padua on 4 December 1717 with J.G. Woolfe, presumably his tutor, since Woolfe was on his second visit.1 On 1 January 1718 'a son of Sir Cane James with a Mr Wolf' were in Venice for the Carnival.2
A Mr James was recommended by Lord Grantham (formerly Thomas Robinson) to Thomas Pelham in Rome, but he would not 'I fear, make a long stay'; Pelham confirmed on 1 April that 'Mr James will not stay long in Rome'.1 A Mr James, probably the same, had seen the Duke of Gloucester at Rome and Florence in 1777 [i.e. in April].2

Messrs Jamineau and Rousseau, merchants in Venice, are recorded in 1716 and 1724.1 Claude Jamineau was in Padua on 23 June 1721;2 he had died by 1727, see Isaac Jamineau, and in 1728 the firm had become Phillipe Rousseau.3 The 'Jemmeneau' who provided lodgings for the London-based Roman Club in Leghorn in the 1720s was conceivably Claude (rather than his son).4 See also Peter Jamineau.
On 2 October 1753 Jamineau, 'lately appointed Consul at Naples' sailed from Lisbon1 and arrived in Naples in December; he had apparently come out from England.2 His appointment was again confirmed in 17633 and his replacement, James Douglas, was appointed in 1779. Jamineau had been wanting to return to England in 1770;4 he applied for a passport to travel to Rome in April 1775,5 and he may have been in London in December 1776.6  Jamineau appears to have been a difficult and pretentious man, at least in his later years. He was 'jealous of his rights and privileges' vis à vis William Preston, the chargé d'affaires, when arranging the deceased Lord Baltimore's effects, and he alleged that, because of his friendship with the Abbé Grant, William Hamilton held Jacobite views. The Abbé suggested Jamineau was 'a French Jew',7 while he called Grant 'a damned rascal', and it was equally tactless of him to have a seal cut 'of his own Portrait with the Consular fasces' and to assume the air of 'a sort of minister' in Naples.8 Lady Hamilton later wrote that 'truth is not a quality that Jamineau is famous for'.6 But Charles Burney found him very helpful9 and for John Morgan he was both a friend and connoisseur - the patron of Benjamin West and Angelica Kauffman and one well capable of assessing the young J.S. Copley's abilities.10 Jamineau collected works of art; he was exporting pictures and marbles from Rome in 1770 and 1771 and he shared a sale in London in 1768 (Langford's 3-4 Mar.).11 His collection of 179 pictures and 5 sculptures was sold in 1790 (Christie's, 26 Feb.) and his portrait by Angelica Kauffman painted at Ischia in 1763 (according to its inscription) is in the Landeshauptstadt, Bregenz.

Probably another son of Claude Jamineau, Peter Jamineau, a merchant in Venice, sometimes acted as an agent for Rosalba Carriera with English clients. He was acting for Robert Dingley in June 1735 and June 1739, and for Sir Robert Wood in September 1742.1 He was probably the Jamineau who sold two landscapes by Zuccarelli to Arthur Pond in August 1739.2 In Padua in September 1744 Alexander Drummond met 'Mr Guyon, a Swedish consul, and Mr Jamineau, [who] were so kind as to invite me to their house at Padua'.3 Martha Jamineau Guyon and 'Peter Ph. Jamineau' were together in Padua on 2 May 1745.4




Mr Jeans a Scotch sculptor' arrived in Rome in 1767,1 and 'Gulielmo Teans Scozzese scultore - 40' was living in the Palazzo Piombini on the Via Babuino at Easter 1768.2

D. Jeffereys, a teacher of modern languages, published A Journal from London to Rome ... [n.d.] describing the above itinerary.
Mr and Mrs Jefferies were in Naples sometime between 1 December 1792 and 24 March 1793, Mr Jefferies attending the Opera there with Robert Parker on 3 March.1 A 'Mr Jefferies' was one of a number of 'drinking Irish' in Naples in February/March 1794.2 In 1794 'Mr Jeffries' was in Venice, 'but Mrs J. was not there'.3 They were evidently the Mr and Mrs 'Geffries' / 'Gieffries' / 'Giuseppe Joffenses' / 'j561Jefferejs' who were in Venice and Verona during the summer of 1794 (sometimes described as Irish) and were again in Venice from January to March 1795.4
While he was minister plenipotentiary at Paris, Jefferson made a tour of southern France and northern Italy in 1787. He was particularly interested to discover why the French preferred Piedmontese rice to that from the Carolinas. From Nice he crossed the Alps by mule and came to Turin on 16 April 1787, but he spent only two weeks in Italy. He later wrote 'I scarcely got into classical ground'; he decided that there was insufficient evidence to be certain of Hannibal's route across the Alps; 'in architecture, painting, sculpture, I found much amusement; but more than all in their agriculture, many objects of which might be adopted with us to great advantage' (E. Dumbauld, Thomas Jefferson, American Tourist, 100-3).
On the recommendation of Sir Joshua Reynolds, the Society of Dilettanti awarded Jefferys its first travelling scholarship in 1775. Soon after reaching Rome, Jefferys wrote to the Society discussing details of the payment of his stipend; he said he had landed at Leghorn 'after a very tedious and dangerous voyage of near three months', and had proceeded by land to Rome, where he arrived on 7 October 1775.1 He gave his address as the English Coffee House, Piazza di Spagna. Thomas Jones saw him there in November 1776.2 A drawing of Ulysses overcome with Emotion at the Singing of Demodocus at King Alcinous' Feast (RA) is inscribed, 'Sborzato a Roma Februaro 1777', and another, Women Weavers abandon their Work to Dance and make Music (RA), 'Questa fur fatta a Fiorenza 1777'. On 13 December 1777 Thomas Banks said Jefferys was in Rome.3 The date of his departure from Italy is unknown. The fellowship from the Society of Dilettanti was for three years, but Edwards said he 'staid in Italy about four years'.4 Since he is not recorded back in England until September 1781, he probably remained in Italy until that year. Jefferys is not known to have painted in oil in Italy, but he produced a number of drawings; Alexander Day told Ozias Humphry 'I have seen a drawing wch he has made since his arrival wch I think has infinite merit'.5 With the rediscovery in 1976 of signed drawings by Jefferys in the Maidstone Library it became possible to establish his oeuvre; it reflects the influences of both Thomas Banks and Fuseli, while the exploration of Michelangelo and the Mannerists led to horrific and violent subjects. A group of unsigned sketches dated to June and July 1779, formerly attributed to the Master of the Giants, is now given to Jefferys, and they were presumably also executed in Rome.6



Very gay and well with all the rich and great Italians', Jeffrey offered to introduce Robert Adam to all the 'Quality houses' in Rome (Fleming, Adam, 158).




She was described in Rome in April 1790 as a 'tall slender damsel out of powder & tho' very English not the style of the fashionable World in England'.1 She was painted in Rome with her uncle by Angelica Kauffman (NPG). Her husband was the nephew of Thomas Jenkins's neighbour on the Corso.


Through his energy and urbanity, and regrettably through his duplicity, Thomas Jenkins became the richest and most influential figure of the English colony in Rome in the second half of the eighteenth century'.1 Born in Rome in the parish of S.Maria del Popolo, he had gone to London to study painting under Thomas Hudson but, wrote Henry Lyte in 1758, 'not being satisfied with that part of his profession' he came to Rome 'about seven years since in order to study history painting which he has done with great application'.2 He had arrived in Rome late in 1751 with Richard Wilson3 and they had travelled from Venice with William Lock. Wilson and Jenkins were lodging in the Piazza di Spagna in 1752-3 (and Wilson's drawing of Jenkins in the Pierpont Morgan Library was presumably made at this time). In 1752-3 both Jenkins and Wilson were patronised by Thomas Brand and Thomas Hollis and by Lord Dartmouth and Lord North. Thomas Brand sat to Jenkins in 1753 (Christie's, 18 Jun. 1976), and he appears to have introduced Wilson and Jenkins to the young Lords he had met in Venice, Dartmouth and North. Jenkins painted their portraits and Dartmouth commissioned from him a Nymph and a number of drawings. In 1753 Stephen Beckingham commissioned a Time discovering Truth, and a Hagar and Ishmael by Jenkins is known through a copy by Nikolaus Mosmann (BMPL).4 In 1754 he exported to England two landscapes and a portrait (possibly that of Francisco Geminiani now in a priv. coll.).5 As a painter he was elected on 5 October 1760 to the Accademia Clementina in Bologna;6 on 11 January 1761 to the Accademia di S.Luca in Rome (the same day as Gavin Hamilton),7 and on 11 April 1761 to the Florentine Academy8 but, although described as pittore in the stati dell'anime until 1773, little more is heard of Jenkins the artist.9  Jenkins was also pursuing commercial and antiquarian interests, which were ultimately to prove far more profitable. In January 1753 Hollis was lending Jenkins money to prevent him having to sell off his 'trinkets' cheaply, thinking it only right to set 'an ingenious man a little upon his legs'.10 The following year Jenkins was buying quantities of paintings, drawings and prints for Lord Dartmouth with money 'paid for the use of Lord Dartmouth in 1753 and 1754'.11 Brand and Hollis then supported 'Mr Jenkins, the antiquary, during his struggles against a Scottish faction'.10 He had been accused of taking an unreasonable profit on a bust he had sold, which had led to a threat of banishment by the government of Rome. Cardinal Albani (to whom Horace Mann had introduced Jenkins in July 1753), told Mann that such criticism was due more to the spirit of cabal than reason, and that the Jacobite Abbé Grant for one seemed jealous of Jenkins; Mann, Albani, Lord Dartmouth and Lord North all spoke up for him and the threat was averted.12 In the course of the 1750s Skelton, Forrester, James Russel and John Parker all believed that Jenkins had mischievously undermined their reputations with British travellers through allegations of Jacobitism. In 1758 Forrester's brother, an Irish MP, told him to 'take care how you keep company with one Jenkins ... he is a Spy in Rome for our Government', and in 1760 the Jacobite Andrew Lumisden described him as having 'long been known here for his villainies. However, by consummate impudence, joined to the honourable office of a spy, he gets himself commended to many of the English travellers'.13 It was at this time that Jenkins sold to Lord Fordwich (later 3rd Earl Cowper) four old masters which both Robert Strange and Ignazio Hugford, amongst others, considered second rate. Strange said that one, a Perseus and Andromeda, had been turned down by Richard Dalton at 30 crowns, and sold a few days later for 40 to Jenkins, who got £150 for it from Lord Fordwich, see Robert Strange. Other criticism, however, was both jealous and political, and Jenkins could tell Lord Cardigan in 1762 that 'his foolish enemies' had now 'fallen into the pit they dug for me'.14 He emerged, said Richard Lyttelton, 'bright like a George 3rd shilling'.15 But there remained room for speculation as to how Jenkins (who lacked, for example, Gavin Hamilton's comfortable background) had so rapidly established himself in commerce. According to Thomas Jones, Jenkins had 'luckily contracted for part of a Cargo of an English Ship at Civitavecchia, which being disposed of to great Advantage in Rome, he thereby laid the foundation of his future fortune'.16  In 1757 Hollis had sponsored Jenkins (a 'student of painting in Rome') as a member of the Society of Antiquaries in London. Hollis and Brand communicated to the Society Jenkins's first reports from Rome (1757-61), and by 1772 he had sent fifteen letters describing excavations in and around Rome, with eighteen drawings of individual antique sculptures.17 His letters contained an element of self-advertisement; one described his first excavation at Corneto in May 1761 sponsored by Joseph Wilcocks, another (April 1761) proposed Winckelmann and Prince Emilio Altieri as new members-indicating that Jenkins was now a man of some reputation in Rome. He had earned the respect of the leading connoisseurs in Rome. Winckelmann recommended him as agent for the sale of the Baron Stosch gem collection in 1763;18 he was asked by Henry Hoare to superintend the progress of Mengs's Caesar and Cleopatra in 1759-60; when the Duke of York came to Rome in 1764 Albani advised Mann that there was nobody better than Jenkins to escort him round the city.19 In 1764 a Raccolta di Alcuni Disegni by Guercino, 28 plates engraved by a number of hands including Piranesi and Bartolozzi, was dedicated to Jenkins.  Jenkins lived on the Corso in the parish of S.Lorenzo in Lucina from 1757. At first he shared an address with the painter John Plimmer (who d. 1760), then in 1765 he moved to a larger house, still on the Corso, which in time he extended. It appears that having established his reputation Jenkins became less scrupulous in advancing it. In 1761 James Adam wrote that Jenkins, 'who plays his cards to admiration', had sold last winter 'no less than £5000 worth of pictures &ca. to the English of which every person of any knowledge is convinced he put £4000 in his pocket'.20 In 1765 he sold 'the greatest part of the Paintings and Sculpture that I had' to William Weddell,21 including the Barberini Venus. The torso of this figure was found by Gavin Hamilton in a cellar of the Barberini Palace; Jenkins bought it and another antique head from Joseph Nollekens was added. The statue was then advertised at a thousand guineas or more, which Weddell agreed, but export was only allowed when it was alleged that the King of England was the buyer, and the export fees were then reduced through a detailed report of the restoration to the custom-house authorities.22 Nollekens recalled other incidents from the 1760s: how he made up fragments of terra-cotta reliefs adding patina with tobacco juice, and how Jenkins was then 'supplying foreign visitors with Intaglios and Cameos made by his own people, that he kept in a part of the Coliseum, fitted up for 'em to work in slyly by themselves ... he sold 'em as fast as they made 'em'.23 Jenkins was apparently an adept salesman, and would shed tears at parting with a prized possession.24 William Patoun warned that 'Jenkins an English Picture dealer and Broker on the Corso will try to tempt you. He does not enjoy the best reputation in the World' (see above, p.xlvii).  Jenkins became a particular favourite of Clement XIV (Pope 1769-74) and came to be described as 'all-powerful'.25 Northcote said 'his gate and stairs used to be lined with petitioners as it was in his power to make the Pope do as he pleased ... The people used to call Mr Jenkins Illustrisimus and kiss his hand, and it was even in his power to get the freedom for one condemned to the galleys'.26 Jenkins escorted Sir William Hamilton to an informal audience late in 1772 (see Hamilton); he received the Duke of Gloucester, who watched the start of the Corso dei Cavalli from his window in 1772, and the Duke of Cumberland dined with him in 1774. The Abbé Grant wrote in 1774 that Jenkins 'now keeps his equipage and has by dealing in pictures and antiques cleard to himself a fortune of at least 1500 lbs a year'.27 A travel guide, Le véritable guide des voyageurs en Italie published in Rome in 1775 was dedicated to him. In 1775 he took as a country retreat fine apartments in a villa at Castel Gandolfo which had formerly belonged to the General of the Jesuits, whose order had been suppressed in 1773, and Father Thorpe described this house as 'a sort of trap' for rich young Englishmen prepared to spend large sums on antiquities.28  By 1776 Jenkins had also set up as a banker in Rome. Thomas Jones then said that he had nearly superceded Barrazzi, who had been the 'chief Banker imploy'd by the English', and when the young artist dined with him on Christmas Day 1776 he described him, understandably as 'our Patron the great Mr Jenkins'.29 In the 1770s Jenkins held dinners for British artists each Christmas and he helped them by obtaining access to private collections for copying, in particular the Vatican (even though Pius VI, according to Northcote, could not 'suffer the smell of oil colours'). He appears to have been closest to the sculptor Hewetson, to whom he left a ring in his will; Hewetson's most distinguished sitters (from Clement XIV and the Duke of Gloucester to Charles Townley) were each allied with Jenkins. Later, in 1794, John Deare bitterly described how Jenkins had recommended 'his very good friend Hewetson' to Lord Berwick, and cast aspersions on his [Deare's] work.30 Jenkins was Angelica Kauffman's banker for at least ten years (1785-95), and in 1790 she painted 'out of friendship' Jenkins with his niece Anna Maria (NPG) and received in return gifts of antiquities.31 But Jenkins was not greatly concerned with artists, and his Christmas dinners stopped, according to Thomas Jones, in 1780.32  In his last two reports to the Society of Antiquaries in London Jenkins described how Clement XIV was giving 'incouragement' to the Collecting of Antiquities, and was tempting many to search for them. Jenkins acquired a considerable part of the collections from the Villa Mattei in 1775, he bought pieces from the Villa d'Este,33 and he was also taking his share in the findings from Gavin Hamilton's excavations. The so-called Jenkins Vase (NMW), was bought from the Caraffa collection in Naples, probably in 1769, as an antique well-head; it was converted into a vase with additions made by his restorers (probably Carlo Albacini, Cavaceppi's pupil, and Lorenzo Cardelli).34 Jenkins told Townley in 1774 that it 'turns out so fine that I believe it will be Sold for £500. in short it is the Very first Vase in the World'. Jenkins's resident antiquarian, Orazio Orlandi, published an account of the iconography, and the vase was sold in the 1770s to Smith Barry, one of Jenkins's important clients and one whose financial circumstances compelled him to profit from Jenkins's ability to offer unlimited credit.35 Charles Townley remains Jenkins's best-known client for antiquities, and their correspondence from 1768-98, amounting to nearly 1000 sheets, is in the Townley MSS; it emerges that Townley also played a part in Jenkins's business dealings, acting as his agent for many English collectors. In September 1785 Jenkins made perhaps his most astonishing acquisition from the entrepreneur Giuseppe Staderni, the antiquities from the Villa Montalto-Negroni;36 apart from some outstanding pieces which were sold to Townley, it included Bernini's Neptune and Triton which he sold to Joshua Reynolds (now VAM). In 1794 Jenkins was associated with Sir Corbet Corbet and Robert Fagan in excavations at Campo Iemini.  His later years in Rome were very grand. He received Royal visitors to see his collections in the Corso; the Archduchess Maria Christina in 1776, the future Paul of Russia in 1782, Gustavus III of Sweden in 1784, Princess Albertina of Sweden in 1793, and Prince Augustus in 1791 and 1794. It was Jenkins who called on the Pope (Pius VI) with the Prince's Master of Ceremonies, Baron von Hanstein, to announce Augustus's arrival. In 1793 Sir William Forbes wrote that Jenkins had 'long been a sort of Introductor to British travellers residing in Rome, where there being no British ambassador, Mr Jenkins may have been said to have done the honours of the nation'; he added that Jenkins was said to have a fortune of £100,000.37 There are few glimpses of the private man. He was often called polite; 'a man of extraordinary talents and taste and of very agreeable and obliging manners', wrote Gardenstone;38 the Countess of Bristol told her daughter Lady Elizabeth Foster that Jenkins would be a pleasanter cicerone than James Byres, 'as he knows as much, and will communicate his instruction less en routine'.39 There was even an engaging honesty in the way he refunded dissatisfied clients, but his portraits, by Angelica Kauffman and Anton Maron (1791; Accademia di S.Luca), convey a tight, close personality. He appears to have been kind to his family. In 1778 one of his nephews, John Jenkins, a painter then twenty-four years old, came to stay with him, and in 1781 a second nephew, James, arrived. In 1779 Jenkins told Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) that 'my Nephew who acts as a Banker' would be happy to serve him, and he again mentioned his nephew in February 1780.40 His niece Anna Maria lived with him in Rome from 1788 until her marriage in 1794 to one Giovanni Martinez. She may have come to Italy with Jenkins, who went to England in the summer of 1788 to purchase, it was said, 'an estate of seven thousand acres between Exeter and Honiton'.41 He had previously been in London in 1769,42 but a third visit, projected for the spring of 1792 to deal with his affairs in Devon where the 'The Manor of Sidmouth promises something of consequence',43 was cancelled because of the events in France.44  In 1795 Jenkins made a six week tour of 'Leghorn, Siena, and other places for his health',45 but it was the French invasion which led to his final departure in 1798. His banking business was taken over by Castelli & Co,46 and his collections, with the exception of his gems and medals, were left behind to the French. He died at Yarmouth just after he landed.
Charles Greville wrote to his uncle Sir William Hamilton on 27 November 1790 from London to introduce the son of Lord Hawkesbury, 'who proposes to spend the winter in Naples'.1 In July 1791 'the Honble Mr Jenkinson and Mr [Charles John] Brandling' had delivered letters of introduction from John Dick to Thomas Jenkins in Rome.2

The young Welsh Squire, 'stout Mr Jenner,' was in Florence with a bear-leader. 'The pupil's pursuit', Pryse Gordon recalled, 'was to find out the best eating and drinking, while the doctor employed his whole time in hunting for vertu'. Jenner drank 'six huge flasks' of Florentine vino Chiante 'without being in the smallest degree intoxicated' and was about to go to Venice when Pryse Gordon left Florence (Gordon, Personal Memoirs, 1:179, 181).
A careless and unsuspicious character', and somewhat eccentric, Jennings is said to have spent eight years in Italy, three of them in Rome, and subsequently to have visited Sicily. It has also been said that he travelled out with John, Lord Brudenell (who was in Paris for two years before arriving in Genoa in December 1754).1 He was 'an ardent customer of Cavaceppi's' and it was Cavaceppi who restored for him (and attributed to Phidias) the celebrated marble 'Dog of Alcibiades' which Jennings discovered in Rome and bought for 400 scudi (Duncombe Park, Yorks).2 He was in Venice in March 1761, when he witnessed Lady Mary Wortley Montagu's will,3 and commissioned a mould to be made of Egyptian characters, subsequently studied by Needham.4 In his 1778 sale (Christie's, 4 Apr.) there were two views of Rome by Delane and a Head of Venus by Willison, all probably acquired in Rome.
Travelling with 'a Duchess', he passed through Turin and Genoa in November 1778, on his way to Antibes and Calais (Genoa cons.corr. MSS; J. Brame, Genoa, 3, 14 Nov. 1778).
Jermy was a merchant banker at Leghorn for many years. 'Holder and Jermy', resident in Leghorn, signed a memorial in March 1743.1 In 1757 Augustus Hervey visited a house of Mr Jermy's at Monte Nero,2 probably the Villa Dupouy.3 On his death (30 October 1781), Horace Mann called Jermy 'An English splendid merchant, who acquired a large fortune [in Leghorn], and having no relations ... left the greatest part of his fortune to a godson' [Henry Proby, b. 1769]; he also left money to Lord Tylney, Lord Cowper and Horace Mann, and his will drew the comment from Horace Walpole that he was 'an ostentatious fool'.4 He was buried at Leghorn.5 See also Charles Proby.
Jerningham was in Naples in November 1777 when he met Henry Swinburne,1 and in about March 1778 'Chevalier Jerningham' was in Rome.2 'Illmo Sig. Carlo Cav.e Jerningham - 38' was living near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1790,3 and Elizabeth Gibbes met him in Florence in August 1790 and again in Pisa in September.4

Lord Jersey travelled with a tutor, Captain Wood, a Scottish officer on half pay. They were in Padua on 27 November 1728.1 By 10 February 1729 they had reached Rome, where they consorted with Jacobites before leaving for Naples on 17 April.2 On their return to Rome Lord Jersey met the 5th Duke of Hamilton, and on 5 May he set out with Wood on his homeward journey.3
Charles Jervas was in Rome by the end of 1700 but there are no details of his voyage out. In 1698 he had been in London copying the Raphael cartoons at Hampton Court for Dr George Clark of All Souls, Oxford, who lent him £50 to travel to Italy in 1699.1 On Christmas Day 1700 Jervas wrote from Rome to Matthew Prior describing the seriousness of his studies: he had been buying prints but he had not yet 'touched a pencil in Rome, and intend this year too for drawings and then something of Guido, Titian and Correggio for the colouring etc.'2 He later told George Vertue that although he was then thirty years old, he had 'begun at the wrong end, and had only studied colouring'.3 In 1701 Addison in Rome observed that 'Mr Gervaise makes very great Improvements, and tis thought will be an extraordinary Artist. He begins already to pity Titian and is so well vers'd among the ancient statues that he talks as familiarly of Phidias's and Praxiteles's Manner as he wd. do in England of Knellars & Cloistermans'.4 Jervas, who was called 'Carlo Jervasi' in Italy, was seen several times in Rome between 1702 and 1705 by the Duke of Shrewsbury.5 On 7 February 1702 he went with Jervas and John Dryden 'to see pictures of an Oratorian at Chiesa Nuova'. On 9 July, he referred to 'Mr Jervaise Carton'-possibly the cartoon by Raphael for the Transfiguration, which Jervas had bought in Rome, but was not permitted to export. Jervas threatened that the British Navy would blow up Civitavecchia and refused the money given to him in compensation, which was left waiting for him in a bank account in Rome until his second visit.6 (Later at Rome in January 1721 Rawlinson saw 'a piece of M... bought by Mr Jarvis an English painter for a trifle, but by his prating lost it, the Pope obliging him to accept of 400 Crownes for it').7 In 1703 Jervas painted Shrewsbury's portrait: there were sittings on 1 and 25 February and 18 March. On 10 June Jervas and Edward Wortley Montagu (1678- 1760) called on Shrewsbury 'to look upon the draft for Whitehall. On 24 and 28 July 1704, and again on 14 August, Shrewsbury referred to a quarrel between Jervas and a Mr Gordon in the English Coffee House. On 21 September 1704 Jervas signed his will with Shrewsbury, Goodere [Goodiere], Venables, and Tom Burford as witnesses: 'he gave it into my custody', wrote Shrewsbury, 'in case of my death, to be delivered to Mr Baldwyn, his uncle, at Shrewsbury'. On his return to London in 1709, Jervas was regarded with great respect. Steele described him as 'the last great painter Italy has sent us', but Vertue declared that his work 'answered not expectation'.8 Jervas returned to Italy in 1738, not only to buy pictures for the royal collection and to withdraw from his bank account the money for the Raphael drawing,9 but principally for reasons of health. According to Vertue, 'Mr Jervis painter being long in a Lingring ill state of health - last October went abroad to try if the air of Italy or travelling would be beneficial to his health - returned back in May 1739 not much better'.10 He died in London on 2 November 1739, after which most of his collection of paintings and drawings were sold at a sale lasting thirty-four days.11  The contents of the sale showed that Jervas acquired a considerable number of paintings and drawings in Italy. Vertue said he used 'at Rome to [buy] whole cargoes at once by this means he got some good - amongst an infinite number of trash'.12 The sale contained many paintings by Jervas after Van Dyck, Reni, Sacchi, Giordano and Titian, and many drawings, as well as paintings, after Maratti. Vertue mentioned 'works by Giuseppe Chiari, 'Petro de Petri and other painters'12 and particularly mentioned Jervas's elaborate copies of heads after Guido Reni which, he considered, had rather led him astray as a portrait painter, for he neglected 'true drawing from Nature' in pursuing an ideal.13
Jervis commanded the Alarm, the frigate on which the Duke of Gloucester sailed to Italy in 1771,1 and he accompanied the Duke on his subsequent tour. He had previously called at Leghorn with the Alarm sometime in 1769.2

Milord Jocelyn Irlandois' was presented at the Court of Turin on 16 December 1780.1 He was probably the 'Milord Giasselon' who visited the Bagni di S.Giuliano (near Padua) in July 1781.2 He was certainly in Rome in December when James Byres was his cicerone.3


Johnes travelled with Robert Liston as his tutor; they were in Paris in November 1769 and were then soon expected home.1 But they arrived in Venice on 2 August 1770 ('Tomaso Ioahnes di Roberto; Roberto Liston'),2 and it is said Johnes was in Italy while Thomas Banks (whose patron he became) was there, i.e. 1772-9.3
Charles and Robert Johnson were Americans travelling though France and Italy in 1792-3. Their travel journal is in the Duke University Library, Durham, North Carolina. Robert Johnson and Julian Denning, 'Inglesi Americani', stayed in Venice for a week in April 1793 (ASV is 767).
Johnson had studied and been ordained at the English College in Rome 1746-55.1 He became chaplain to the Strickland family of Sizergh and in 1782 travelled with the young Thomas Strickland to Italy. They were in Rome in January 17822 and resided at the Mazarine College (Kirk); on 10 April 1784 they arrived in Venice,3 and they were said to be in Paris on their way to England in May.4
In The Leeds Intelligencer, 5 June 1787, Johnson advertised as an architect, 'having been under the Inspection of James Wyatt ... three years, and having since resided in Rome, and seen all the principal Cities of Italy'.1 He was conceivably the 'Gians', an English Protestant architect aged 23 living in the Via Babuino in Rome at Easter 1785,2 and the Johnson who arrived in Venice on 2 November 1786.3

Lord Johnston had been abroad in 1713 at the same time as his father (William, 1st Marquess of Annandale), but it is not clear that they were travelling together, or that the son was then in Italy.  In 1718 Lord Johnston went to Italy with a tutor, Thomas Robertson, and was in Padua on 9 January 1718.1 They were to leave Venice on 6 March with Lord Linton, following the Duke of Queensberry to Rome. Although they did not intend to stop along the way, a report at the beginning of April indicated that Lord Johnston had been ill at Ravenna.2 In Rome Johnston sat to Andrea Procaccini (Hopetoun) and he had dealings with the Scottish painter John Alexander who, with Johnston, left some antique marbles for restoration with the sculptor Agostino Cornacchini together with a commission. Johnston was still in Italy in November 1720 when Rawlinson met him at Bologna.3 His father died the following January, and presumably he returned home soon after to succeed as the second Marquess of Annandale.  He is said to have returned to Scotland with one of the largest consignments of objects of art and antiquity ever brought home by a travelling collector, his account book listing over 300 paintings (the artists including Brandi, Maratti, Guercino and Van Wittel) and drawings, besides engravings, books and classical marbles.4 His heir and nephew John Lord Hope (later 2nd Earl of Hopetoun), had purchased some of these works on his own grand tour in 1725-6; he shipped three crates back to his uncle in Scotland, which included a large painting and two copies after Brandi by G.B. Benaschi. Annandale had requested as many drawings as he could find by Juvarra (having in mind the facade William Adam was then building at Hopetoun). Lord Hope failed to recover anything from Cornacchini, Annandale guessing that the antiquary Ficoroni had 'a finger in this pie'. Annandale's final visit to Italy was made when he was fatally ill with consumption. Attended by a Dr Cuningham, he arrived in Rome on 30 April 1729 and was 'going shortly' to Naples.5 He must have written to his nephew of his disappointment in the changes he found at Rome, as Lord Hope wrote to him 'I can easily believe it is much changed to the worse since you knew it first, which I reckon is entirely owing to the British, especially with relation to the virtuosi.'6 He died at Naples on 10 February 1730. Twenty-four years later his younger nephew the Hon. Charles Hope-Weir took the Marquess's Italian note-book with him as his guide to Italy.7
On 11 March 1775 Horace Mann wrote that Lady Henrietta Johnston had lately been in Florence 'for a few days';1 'Generale Johaston' was listed in Florence on 25 February.2



He was presented to the Grand Duke in Florence by Horace Mann on 30 October 1773,1 and was possibly the 'Julif' who with his wife and daughter arrived in Venice on 25 April 1774.2


On 14 December 1780 'Filippo Iohnas ebreo di Nazionale Inglese', living in the via Condotti, sought permission to perform as a magician outside the ghetto in Rome (Bertolotti, Relazioni di Inglesi col Governo pontifico [1888], 15).

He was travelling as governor to J. Kellond. They were together in Padua on 20 November 17101 and went on to Venice.2 They were in Rome between 28 March and 20 July when they saw John Bellings and George Waters on several occasions.3 They were again in Venice on 11 September 1711,4 and in Utrecht on 9 November.5 A David Jones, conceivably the same, arrived in Padua on 9 November 1719.6

Jones was travelling with the Edwins, relations of his mother (see Catherine Edwin). On 16 November 1730 they had recently arrived in Rome and were then intending to stay several months.1 Jones is said to have been in Leghorn in December 1730,2 and to have visited Naples and Venice.3 He bought several pictures in Rome, and on his death it was alleged that 'those pieces which Mr Jones Bought abroad cost 700£'.4 An inventory of 1743 lists 32 pictures, including a copy of Raphael's Transfiguration and several unattributed old masters, of which a Narcissus and Echo by Placido Costanzi and a Panini (dated 1731) remain at Fonmon.3
The son of a Welsh squire, Thomas Jones set out for Italy at the age of thirty-four, already a painter of some accomplishment, and a dedicated pupil of his compatriot, Richard Wilson. Imperturbable and friendly, his Memoirs vividly convey the hazards of travel and of his profession.1 He once observed that the Romans classified English visitors into three groups, 'like the Positive, Comparative and Superlative of the Grammarians': artists, 'mezzi cavalieri ... who lived genteely, independent of any profession', and the 'Milordi Inglesi'; Jones himself combined the positive with parts of the comparative.  The seven years he spent in Italy were shared between Rome and Naples, where he passed his last three years. He travelled out with Christopher Norton (James Byres's associate) and they joined the young architect Thomas Hardwick in Paris. Crossing the Alps on 5 November 1776, they made brisk progress to Rome. In Florence they met so many other English travellers at Hadfield's hotel that Jones 'could scarcely help fancying [himself] in England' and at Rome he immediately met in the English Coffee House the numerous colony of British and Irish artists. Norton promptly introduced him to James Byres. The next day he saw St Peter's, 'I suppose the grandest effort of human art in the world', and he was introduced to the Duke of Gloucester. But such excitement abated, and he was soon describing the Coffee House as 'a filthy vaulted room, the walls of which [were] painted with Sphinxes, Obelisks and Pyramids, from capricious designs by Piranesi, and fitter to adorn the inside of an Egyptian-Sepulchre than a room of social conversation'.  During his first period in Rome, from May 1776 to September 1778, Jones changed his lodgings four times. He first stayed near the Piazza di Spagna in 'a melancholy chamber' hung with 'dirty dismal pictures'. On 27 May 1777 he moved into Tresham's lodgings on the Corso, where the lady of the house turned out to be unscrupulous. On 1 December 1778, after suffering two robberies, he moved in with one of Thomas Jenkins's servants, who proved excitable, necessitating a further move. But while suffering these domestic hazards, Jones discovered the country round Rome which, he reflected, 'seems formed in a peculiar manner by Nature for the Study of the Landscape-Painter'. In particular, a visit to Gensano and Lake Nemi led him to describe that area (as a Wilson pupil would) as a 'beautiful and picturesque Country - every scene seemed anticipated in some dream - It appeared Magick Land'.  Jones fraternised with the other artists in Rome. In the spring of 1777 he was sketching by Lake Nemi with William Pars, Tresham and Hardwick, and in June 1778 he was working with J.R. Cozens, making 'some Studies in Oil of the surrounding scenery' from a Villa outside the Porta Pia. In May 1778 he sat to Thomas Banks for his bust, in exchange for a painting. In August 1777 he had met that 'great but eccentric genius Piranesi'. Meanwhile he made a list of English visitors to his studio, headed by the Bishop of Derry who bought his large Lake Albano (painted between 12 June and 21 August 1777). Other landscapes were bought by Count Edouard Dillon and Blackden. On 11 September 1778 Jones left Rome with the sculptor Giuseppe Plura for his first visit to Naples, which lasted five months. They stayed at the Capella Rossa, before moving to a house kept by a Swiss, 'Sormanj', married to an Englishwoman. They met James Clark the antiquary and were briefly joined by the landscape painter Jacob More, and the architects Hardwick, John Henderson and R.W.F. Brettingham on 27 September. From 1 December Jones shared lodgings with James Smith, the American painter, and he frequently enjoyed the company of the musician Stephen Storace and his family. It was also in December that the Bishop of Derry reappeared with John Soane and commissioned two more large pictures, Coast of Baja and Terracina, which Jones delivered in December 1781. He travelled much in the country around Naples-Pozzuoli, Posilippo, Pompeii, Portici, Sorrento, and, of course, he climbed Vesuvius. Jones left Naples on 22 January 1779 and returned to Rome. He stayed at the German House on the Strada Condotta but after two weeks moved to the Strada Gregoriana, where Pars also lodged, in rooms owned by impoverished descendants of Salvator Rosa. When Pars left on 7 June, Jones moved from the second to the first floor and the celebrated, but ageing, German painter Mengs came into the vacated rooms (attended by one of his daughters), and died there on 29 June. Jones had seen Mengs's Perseus and Andromeda, painted for Sir Watkin Williams Wynn, exhibited in the artist's studio in February 1778 and had then commented: 'the principal Merit consisted in its laborious high-Finishing - The result of German flegmatic Industry'.  Though the Memoirs are less than explicit, Jones now entrusted 'the direction of [his] domestic affairs' to Maria Moncke. Recently widowed, she was born in Copenhagen, and had become a Catholic convert in Rome. Two daughters, Anna Maria and Elizabeth Francesca, were born to them in 1780 and 1781, but Jones did not marry her until 1789.2 Domestic happiness was soon marred by the noisy antics of 'a Sicilian Adventurer' on the floor above them, causing dust to fall on Jones's freshly painted pictures - which led him to the challenge with drawn sword. In March 1780, 'having no prospect of any more Commissions at Rome, & those I was engaged in, being all of them Views in the Environs of Naples', he decided to move to Naples. After a contretemps with James Byres because he had taken money directly from a patron, Philip Yorke (instead of through Byres), he sent Maria on in advance on 1 April, and Jones, having left some of his pictures in the care of Pars, arrived in Naples on 24 May 1780. He was to stay three years. After experiencing some brutal customs officials, he arrived at Mrs Sherry's hotel. Soon he had moved into spacious apartments in a large new house by the Dogana del Sale, with a studio and show room, where the only disadvantage was the 'Chaos of Noises filth and Confusion' from the quayside. Jones missed the Anglicised society of Rome, but his own life was also changing with his growing family about him. 'The greater part of my Excursions abroad were mournful and Solitary', he recalled, but he became reconciled to a lack of expectation and resorted to the company of 'two or three Italian Artists whose Sentiments were most congenial with my Own'. Pars joined him for some weeks in October 1780 and again in June and July 1781, when they needed cutlasses to repel assailants on the Isle of Procida. In March 1781 Francis Towne arrived, and they painted together for a month, once finding a secluded site which was 'Salvator Rosa in perfection we only want Banditti to compleat the Picture'; but sbirri di Campagna promptly appeared, 'so we wheeled about and returned to the more cultivated environs of the City'. Jones mentioned in April 1781 making 'several Studies upon paper in oil' and painting a still life in his kitchen in May. Francesco Renaldi (whose portrait of Jones and his family was painted in 1797; NMW) stayed from July to October 1781 and introduced him to Volaire and Giuseppe Benito (painter to the King of Naples). Jones visited the new palace at Caserta, without admiring Benito's paintings for the chapel which were 'bad enough with four or five Others, still Worse by Conca'.  In May 1782 Jones moved into rooms belonging to the Norwegian Thomas Francis (known as the English tailor). He took a separate painting room in a little convent, the Capella Vecchia, 'large and commodious', with one window, from which he made 'finished Studies', in oil on paper. Within a few weeks, however, he was moving again, this time to the third floor in the Vicole del Canale where 'I spent by far the most agreeable part of my Time during my Sojourn in Naples'. In the same street lived the Italian artists Don Luigi [Micheli] and Don Tito [Lusieri], the latter proving a good friend. Jones painted a good deal with him, 'being much in the same line of the profession with myself', and Lusieri introduced him to important foreign clients. In July William Beckford of Fonthill came to see Jones's pictures (though Jones never saw him), and in September with Lusieri he visited Angelica Kauffman who had just arrived in Naples. In November Lusieri introduced Jones as a student to the private drawing academy run by Venuti for the Nobility in Naples. In December Philipp Hackert called on him on behalf of the Bishop of Derry, now the 4th Earl of Bristol, but Jones was not greatly impressed: 'there never was, perhaps, a man who was more endued with the Talent of making People believe that he was the greatest Genius that ever existed'.  His social fortunes began to revive as Sir William Hamilton took notice of him and in December 1782 he moved his studio to the 'Court End of the Town - where I might paint and exhibit my Pictures within the Reach of Visiters'. In March 1783 the 4th Earl of Bristol wrote, with characteristic but suspect largesse, suggesting that all Jones's works should be disposed of in Ireland and offering 'an Establishment under the Roof of his own palace at Londonderry'. In May, when his studio lease ran out, Hamilton allowed him to use the billiard room in his palazzo for his last few weeks in Naples. Jones had been working on a large view of the Campi Flegrei which Hamilton bought for 50 guineas. Then in July Jones had all his 'pictures taken off the straining frames, rolled round a large hollow Cylinder made for the Occasion, and packed up in a Case'. On 3 August, with Maria and his two daughters, he sailed from Naples in a Swedish ship, arriving at Chatham on 2 November 1783 after a hazardous voyage. Many of Jones Italian views were sold by his descendants in 1954 (Christie's, 2 Jul.) and 1961 (Sotheby's, 26 Jul.).
They were wintering in Naples in 1792-3, staying at the Corcelli hotel,1 and they were presumably the Mr and Mrs 'Jons' arriving in Venice on 26 April and leaving before 4 May 1793.2
Mr Jones of Wales', a clergyman, 'related to the Duke of Beaufort' was in Italy with a Mr Pigot. For their stay in Rome, see Richard, 5th Viscount Bulkeley. They were in Leghorn early in February 1727 and in Florence later that month, going on to Bologna (SP 98/26; Skinner, 8 Feb. 1727. SP 98/29; Colman, 1 Mar. 1727).


By 25 December 1700 Colonel Josselyn had left Rome, following Frances, Countess of Salisbury, to Venice (HMC Bath, 3:432).
William Joy, Strong Man to the Great Duke of Tuscany was in Padua on 2 January 1718.1 On 5 September 1722 Rawlinson saw him in Florence (calling him Joyce), describing him as '20 years since taken into the service of the Grand Duke, who allows him a pension of fifteen crownes monthly, but gives him not leave to shew to any without his particular licence'.2 Spence, writing from Florence in April 1733, also said Joy 'has lived here in the Great Duke's pay above these twenty years' and described several of his extraordinary feats.3 He is said (perhaps doubtfully) to have ended his life as a smuggler and to have been drowned in 1734 (DNB). In June 1711 a Mr Joy, an Englishman passing through Florence, was employed by Talman to collect a drawing.4
Kaye had already travelled in Holland, Germany, France and Switzerland before he came to Italy in late September/early October 1763. His letters home (Kaye letters MSS) provide his itinerary. He wrote from Bologna on 25 October saying that he had visited Milan, the Borromean Islands, Pavia, Piacenza, Reggio and Modena; he had met Robert Strange, whose copies of Guercino he much admired, and had been with him to Cento, Guercino's birthplace; Kaye confessed to his aunt that he had 'too much dangling' at Milan, where the Venetian minister had introduced him to nine of the first women of the place; 'happy I shall be to assume my Tonsure again: the Impositions of a few, and the Ignorance of the other ministers of this Church are sufficient to prejudice every young Fellow against Priests of all persuasions'. Kaye intended staying a month in Florence and then proceeding via Siena to Rome and Naples. James Martin saw him in Florence on 10 November, and they met again in Rome on 24 December and in Naples on 4 January 1764.1 On 15 April Kaye wrote from Rome: he had met the Duke of York and had acquired some 'very Valuable Things for a Trifle', including 'a Sardonyx of the Mask of a Bacchanal' bought for a sequin from a gardener he met at Caracalla's Baths; 'it has since been Sett, and is become so valuable, that Garrick offer'd me his Picture by the first hand in Italy for it. The Bargain was politely struck on both sides ... the Picture which is a very fine one after twelve sittings of two hours and a half each is to have the famous Edition of Terence in the Vatican open with its drawings of antique masks, alluding both to the character, and the circumstances of the giver and the Gift'. Kaye thus acquired Batoni's Garrick, now in the Ashmolean Museum (Clark/Bowron 266). James Martin last saw Kaye in Rome on 6 and 14 May 1764,1 and Kaye's next letter was from Vienna on 18 July 1764, saying he had passed through Venice.

Keate's itinerary is revealed in his sketchbook (BMPL), the title page of which is inscribed: Views of ... Antiquity in different parts of France, Italy and Savoy, Switzerland taken in a Tour made ... in the years 1754, 1755 and 1756. Together with some sketches of the Antiquities of Pola; the sketches are pedestrian.1 On 10 May 1755 Cardinal Albani wrote from Rome recommending 'Keate e Swete' who were coming to Turin.2 In the summer of 1756 he was visiting Voltaire at Geneva.3 Keate also wrote Ancient and Modern Rome, A poem written in Rome in the Year 1755 [1760].



Keeble's portrait of the musician Castruccio Bonamici (d. 1761) is said to have been painted in Naples (priv. coll., Naples, 1954).1 Keeble was in Ischia in 1765, then in Bologna where he lived in the house of Domenico Gandolfi and practised as a portrait painter. His portrait of Francesco Zanotti remains in Bologna University, and he also painted the marchesa Marascachi, the conte Massimiliano Gini and other ladies 'e virtuose di Music'. But his best known work, according to Moretti, was the portrait of Cardinal Vincenzo Malvezzi (priv. coll., Bologna, 1948), which, however, was based on Rigaud's portrait of Bossuet in reverse.  Keeble was himself an accomplished violinist and, apparently, a ladies' man; one of his several liaisons was with the musician Margharita Zibetti, 'the Vistoletta'. He was elected to the Accademia Clementina on 11 June 1770. He died in Bologna in straitened circumstances on 12 January 1774 and was buried there. His bust in clay was said to have been made by J.F. Nollekens.2 James Barry attributed his own election to the Accademia Clementina 'to the obliging dispositions of two friends of mine here, Mr Keable and Signor Bianconi'.3
His Italian sketchbook (VAM) is inscribed Keene Archt. 1775 on the fly-leaf. On 3 June 1775 he wrote from Venice to Sir Roger Newdigate saying that, since leaving Rome, he was busy measuring 'the principal buildings of Palladio' and he would afterwards go to Vicenza and Verona for the same purpose.1  A Mr Keene, conceivably the same, was mentioned in Rome by Thomas Banks on 31 July 1773.2

Lord Keith succeeded Lord St Vincent (John Jervis) as commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean fleet in June 1799 and was briefly in Genoa and Leghorn in the course of his operations against the French. He called at Genoa in June 1799 and at Leghorn in January 1800. He went with Nelson to Palermo for a week in February; Keith found that situation 'a scene of fulsome Vanity and Absurdity', and took Nelson with him to Malta on 12 February. Keith captured Genoa from the French on 4 June, but was immediately driven out on the 14th (following the French land victory at Marengo). He was then at Leghorn, where he was joined by Sir Ralph Abercromby in July; they left for Minorca in August (DNB).
His portrait attributed to Trevisani is in a private collection, and he is said to have ordered pictures for Frederick the Great from Batoni, Costanzi and Mengs (J.H. Burton, The Scot Abroad, 1:171).
According to Lumisden, Keith was an unsatisfactory young man who became a Catholic convert at Civitavecchia (Lumisden letters MSS, 28 Aug. 1765).
His father said he was in Naples in February 1791,1 and Mrs Flaxman noted him in Rome in March.2


At the age of sixteen, and already a gifted tenor, Michael Kelly arrived in Naples on 30 May 1779. He was to spend some four years in Italy, subsequently recalled in his Reminiscences [1826], a rambling account in which justifiable self-advertisement outweighs chronology (so that his exact itinerary remains elusive).1 He came to Naples with introductions to Father Dolphin and Sir William Hamilton, and he was met by Fleming and Plunket, cadets in the Irish brigade. There were three conservatories in Naples, and Kelly chose to study under the composer Fedele Fenaroli at S.Maria di Loreto, lodging in his house. He found some three or four hundred other boys there [a considerable exaggeration], studying composition, singing and various instruments. Kelly described the Neapolitan theatres: the splendid S.Carlo for grand serious opera, the Teatro dei Fiorentini and the less good Teatro Nuovo for comic opera. He met Cimarosa (who had been Fenaroli's pupil) and William Hamilton introduced him to the King (who enquired whether he was a Christian). In August he witnessed the great eruption of Vesuvius. On 26 December he went to Rome for the Carnival as the guest of a Mr Stewart, his wife and sister [possibly John Stewart of Allanbank]. He described the theatres of Rome: the Alibert and the Argentina for serious opera and the Capranica and the Valle for comic opera, and mentioned the Abbés as the severest critics, sitting 'in the first row of the pit, each armed with a lighted wax taper in one hand, and a book of the opera in the other'. Father McMahon, an Irish Capuchin, acted as his cicerone.  On his return to Naples he accepted an offer of further voice training in Palermo from Giuseppe Aprile. Kelly was in Palermo until after July 1780. He then sailed back to Leghorn, a voyage of six days, and went on to Florence, where Aprile had recommended him to Andrea Campigli, 'a rich jeweller, who was also manager of the Pergola theatre'. Kelly met Anna and Stephen Storace and was patronised by the merchants George and John Darby, and 'two Scots families, the Grants and Frazers'. He heard the aged Pietro Nardini play in the house of Lord Cowper (to whom Horace Mann had introduced him in a letter of 4 May 1781).2 After Easter 1781 Campigli 'procured him an engagement at the Teatro degl'Intrepidi in Pasquale Anfossi's Il Controgenio and got him rooms with Francesco Cecchi, his stage manager; the Young Pretender attended, but slept throughout the performance. From Florence Kelly made an excursion to Lucca, where he spent two days, and Pisa, where he met the tenor Giuseppe Viganoni.  In June 1781 Kelly accepted an engagement in the Teatro S.Moise, Venice, but he stayed on in Florence during July and August and he mentioned spending three days in Siena at this time. He went to Venice via Bologna and Ferrara which, he said, was 'so thinly peopled that the grass actually grew in many of the [fine wide streets]'. At Venice he found the manager of his engagement had left, being unable to pay the necessary security. Kelly was rescued by the offer of an engagement at Gratz, where he appeared in the autumn of 1781 in Francesco Zannetti's Le Cognate in Contesa.  After suffering a voice infection he returned to Venice and Padua and was engaged to sing in Cimarosa's Il Convito at Brescia. Following a contretemps he escaped to Verona, and performed in Cimarosa's Il pittor parigino at Treviso in the summer of 1782. He was afterwards in Modena, where the Archduchess heard him sing (and beat him 'hollow' at billiards). Kelly finally left Italy to join the newly-revived Italian opera in Vienna in 1783, by which time he would have been in his twentieth year.

Tho: Kempe' was in Padua on 27 January 1725;1 on 4 April he was leaving Rome with Simon Degge and Thomas Anson for Naples.2

Chen, Medico Inglese - 46' was living in the Scuola Pontificia, Strada Felice, in 1777; in 1778 he was listed as aged 47 living in the Strada Felice.1 A 'Mon.Ken', an Irish Protestant aged 36, was living in the Via Babuino at Easter 1780.2

Sometime between July and December 1761 Kendrick was presented to the Duchess of Savoy at Turin (see Carmichael 1761). In May 1762, with his younger companion Thomas Milliken, with whom he had spent some time in the Academy, he left Turin for Florence.1 On 7 January 1763 'Samuel Kendrich' and 'Tomas Milliken' arrived in Venice where they stayed until 8 April.2 James Martin met them both in Geneva in May 1765.3
A Jacobite, brother of Colonel William Kennedy and a friend of the Duke of Ormonde, 'Kennedy' arrived in Rome in August [1722?], and was there on 26 June 1723; Francis Kennedy had 'recently left' the Pretender in Rome on 1 August 1725 (SP 85/14; SP 85/15, Walton).

In May 1751 Sir Thomas was visiting palaces in Rome with Lord Midleton and he had already purchased Piranesi's Views of Rome.1 He appears in the Parody of the School of Athens and in a smaller caricature group, both painted by Reynolds in Rome in 1751 (NGI); he was also caricatured as a 'cellist with his friend John Ward by P.L. Ghezzi (Sotheby's, 23 Mar. 1973). Kennedy is mentioned several times in the circle of Lord Charlemont in Rome in 1752: he was one of the subscribers to the Academy for British artists,2 he made a bet with Charlemont on 20 April, and he was to have played the part of 'Truth' on Charlemont's Triumphal Car for the Carnival. In May Kennedy joined an expedition to Tivoli with Lord Bruce, Lethieullier, Iremonger and Scrope, but on 21 May Scrope and Kennedy were passing through Capua on their way to Naples (Iremonger and Lethieullier following two days later).4 In 1751-2 Pancrazi dedicated a plate from his Antichita Siciliane to 'Sigre Tommasso Kennedy Baronetto Scozzese'. On 19 September 1752 Kennedy and a Mr Cook were leaving Rome for Florence and Lucca,5 and Kennedy was in Vienna in January 1753.6 In June 1753 Kennedy was again in Naples, about to go to Caprea [Capri?] with Cook; John Ward then told Charlemont that 'As Sir Thomas loves the sea and shooting, I fear he'll stay there so long that he'll forget his English likewise. In that case the abbé du Bois must look out for another corrector of the press for the English part of his works'.7 Kennedy was back in Rome in September 1753 and in Paris in November.8  In 1764, after he had succeeded as Lord Cassilis, he returned to Italy, this time for his health. He spent two months taking the waters at Viterbo, and then spent a month in Rome with the Abbé Grant; he intended spending the winter in France.9 In September he paid Batoni a half payment on his portrait10 (Culzean Castle; once identified as of his younger brother David Kennedy, cf. Clark/Bowron 272); this was probably the portrait which the Abbé Grant later told him was being dispatched from Rome in March 1768.11
Travelling with Jasper Clayton (whom Stosch called successively Brigadier, Major and Captain, and Burges called Captain), Kennedy had arrived in Rome by 28 May 1730. Though his brother Francis had been in the Pretender's service, neither William nor Clayton was a Jacobite. By 6 July they had left for Naples with Sir Richard Levinge and Sir Alexander Murray and by 12 October they had left Rome for England.1 Kennedy and Clayton were in Padua on 1 November;2 by 1 December they were in Venice which they left on 12 January, accompanying Edward Walpole as far as Genoa.3


Basil Kennett left London in September 1706 to take up his appointment as the first chaplain to the British Factory at Leghorn,1 where he arrived on 5 December.2 Papal opposition to this new Protestant post was only ended by diplomatic intervention from London, and Kennett continued to officiate in the house of the British consul, Henry Newton.3 He first expressed the wish to end his appointment in 1710, but did not leave until February 1712. Then, with the merchant Humphrey Chetham, he went to Florence and Rome, where both men knew the antiquary Ficoroni (there is a letter from him to Kennett dated 20 November 1712). William Kent described meeting Kennett in Rome in a letter of 17 April 1712.4 Kennett and Chetham were together in Naples in May. Kennett was ill between June and August 1712 and he returned to Leghorn that autumn; in February 1713 he was still unwell in Pisa. He finally sailed from Leghorn in March, and arrived at Dover on 11 July 1713.


Of humble Yorkshire parentage, Kent was sent to Italy as a young painter in 1709 by a consortium of Yorkshire gentlemen.1 He sailed out with the virtuoso John Talman and the architect Daniel Lock. Talman, who was slightly older and referred to Kent's 'bashful temper and inexperience in writing',2 was to help Kent financially and was 'continually apreaching to me yt I may be a great painter', as he told Burrell Massingberd (9 Jun. 1716).3 They spent five months in Florence from 18 November 1709 and were then together in Rome, 'in separate lodgings, but agree very well and every Thursday we spend in seeing fine palaces'.4 In 1711 Kent was sharing lodgings with Lock in the house of 'Tomo Odoard Edual Pittore' [probably Thomas Edwards] on the Strada Paolina; in 1717 he was lodging with the painter Giuseppe Pesci in the same street.5  Sometime in the summer of 1710 Kent met in Rome Sir William Wentworth of Bretton, another Yorkshireman, who then agreed to pay him £40 a year for seven years in return for unspecified work (see Wentworth). Kent studied painting under Giuseppe Chiari, a pupil of Maratti (Kent called him 'my master' in a letter of 24 November 1714). In 1713 Kent won a prize at the Accademia di S.Luca (3 Jun. 1713), being placed second in the second of the painting classes with a drawing for the Miracle of S.Andrea Avellino.6 In 1714 he painted an Agamemnon sending for Briseis and in 1715 a Venus aconducting Helina to Paris; he also began a Holy Family, which he proposed to exhibit 'in ye next shew of pictures here' (20 Jul. 1715). In 1716 he was commissioned by Cardinal Ottoboni to paint a Cyrus instructing the Jews to build the Temple at Jerusalem, and when this picture was exhibited in Rome 'there was great enqurire what scool it was of & who was ye Auther, whch gave a great satisfaction to my friends here' (8 Oct. 1716). Between September and December 1717, 'for impovement & not for gaine' (15 Sep. 1717), he painted a fresco ceiling for the church of S.Giuliano dei Fiamminghi, 'to force my invention & to have practice to paint in fresco' (15 Feb. 1717). Early in 1718 he sent to England a ceiling piece, with figures of Music and Poetry, for Burrell Massingberd. In 1718 he was working on another decorative picture for Sir John Chester, Mercury watching Herse and her Sisters before the Temple of Minerva (Chicheley Hall). Kent had met Burrell Massingberd in Italy in 1712-he had sent a letter from Rome to Wentworth via Massingberd in April 1712.7 On his return to England, Massingberd, with his close friend Sir John Chester, became Kent's patrons, sending him £40 each year 'in ye hopes we had of your becoming a great Painter if you continue ye same dillegence I left you inclined to' (14 May 1713). Massingberd urged him on with his studies, and bid him not to return 'donec Raphaelus secundus eris'. Kent's dutiful letters to Massingberd describe the fitful progress of this patronage. 'I had as leave make a drawing as write a letter', Kent once complained (26 Jan. 1713), but he managed to send pictures, as well as books, prints, bustos, fans, soap and treacle, at least once a year. Of the pictures he sent, the majority were copies he made from Guido Reni, Annibale Carracci, Domenichino, Poussin, Maratti, Veronese and Correggio. Of his own works, apart from the decorative paintings, he sent a Galatea in 1715 and several drawings. He also sent old masters (Vanvitelli, Luti, van Bloemen, so-called copies by Tempesta from Poussin, and a 'Large picture of Carlo Marrat ye figure done by him & ye Landskip by Pussin') and sculpture (a faun and busts of Homer and Paris). Kent gave careful instructions for treating the pictures after their journey: 'put ym upon streanin frames & after wash ym with cleane water then lett ym be out for tow or three nights to take out ye yellownesse caused by ye being roll'd up so long then done over with white of Eggs beat' (20 Jul. 1715). Kent's letters, however reluctantly written, occasionally addressed other topics. 'I wish things were more settled in England', he wrote in 1715, 'but ye Romans fancy whe shall have cevell wars so arts will be lay'd asside they take us to be unsettl'd people & wee are less esteem'd then ever' (12 Oct. 1715). He mistrusted the Scots, who in 1716 'when they appear seem to have fasted ever sence there pretender left Scotland - I have such an averstion against ym & ever sence I came from Monte Vesuvio I fancy they all smell of bremstone' (9 Jun. 1716). He was also unhappy with the visiting dilettanti who 'make me fine promeses untill they get my drawings & then leave me so get nothing for my lose of time or for my drawings' (16 Apr. 1715); it never occurred to Kent to doubt the quality of his work. A year later he was telling Massingberd 'I do study very hard & loose no time with my countrey men', but an exception was Andrew Fountaine who showed Kent his purchases, 'not being willing to trust to ye Italians' (20 Mar. 1716). In 1716 Wentworth's sponsorship ended and Kent told Massingberd 'I can assure you yt I shall always be oblig'd to you & Sr John for without what you have assisted me in I should have been forc'd to have com'd home, for Sr Wm. has write to me to come home this summer if you 'will please to continue a year or tow longer' (9 Jun. 1716). But Kent had already met in Rome other, richer, patrons, Thomas Coke and Lord Burlington, who were to condition his subsequent career.  Kent met Coke in 1714, when Coke was seventeen and Kent nearly thirty. They became friends and Coke paid Kent's expenses on an expedition to northern Italy, for which Kent's MSS Journal, inscribed 'Remarks by way of Painting & Archt.' survives.8 They left Rome on 6 June for Florence, Bologna, and Padua, to arrive on 22 July in Venice. Kent remarked on drawings he saw by Raphael and Giulio Romano and 'made sketches of some peice in every place I came' (24 Nov. 1714) but, as the title of his journal makes clear, his attention was increasingly engrossed by architecture. He left Coke in Padua in August; he was given his expenses back to Parma, and was also paid for pictures he had bought.9 Kent spent a day in Vicenza and four in Mantua, where Giulio Romano's Palazzo del Te elicited the longest entry in his journal. At Parma he stayed 'almost 2 months to Copy something for my study from ye famous coupola of Corrigio' (24 Nov. 1714), though his journal gives his stay as from 7 September to 3 October. In Rome he found Lord Burlington, as Massingberd had warned; concerned that Kent should get him a statue of Meleager from the Palazzo del Pigneto, Massingberd told him 'My Lord Burlington is coming full of money and it is a hundred to one but he will have it' (5 Jul. 1714). Burlington's first visit to Rome was short, but there is little doubt that he then met Kent.  In May 1716 Kent was reunited with Coke in Naples, introducing him to Solimena, 'a modern painter, [who] has put some better Ideas into my head in respect to coulering' (9 Jun. 1716). Kent's lodgings and expences to Naples were paid for by Coke, and other payments to Kent 'by my Master's orders' appear in Coke's accounts on 25 and 28 May. They returned to Rome and then in September 1716 went again to northern Italy. Kent was paid for drawings he bought in Florence and he copied 'a famous Maddona of Corrigio' (8 Oct. 1716); he copied 'fine paintings' on paper at Bologna (15 Feb. 1717); at Modena he was taken ill, but on 12 November Coke paid for a Dr Pammazini to attend him; Kent then caught cold again copying Correggio in Parma (15 Feb. 1717). They returned to Rome on 8 January 1717 and Coke set off for England on 5 April. Kent then acted as his agent; he had an 'imbroglio' over the export of a statue for Coke (15 Jun. 1717), and he was sent £200 in June 1718 for statues, tables, a pedestal and pictures.  In 1717 Kent also met Thomas Hewett, later surveyor general of the King's Works, for whom he drew three heads, sent to England in March 1718. In 1718 he painted a Venus with Aeneas and Achates 'figurs as big as ye life' for the 3rd Duke of Queensberry (16 Aug. 1718), and a comparable Hercules and Eola for Lord Leominster, later 1st Earl of Pomfret (15 Nov. 1718). As his time in Italy drew to a close, Kent told Massingberd that he was 'resolved to have a tryal here of ye difficult & defferent parts of painting & not run ye hassard to begin when I come home. I long to see England, but ye desire I have to do something makes me delay ye more' (8 Jun. 1718). He said he was anxious to resist the new English taste for French painting: 'it is just the same in Painting as ye french Musick is most ungratefull to ye Ears, so is there paintting to ye Eyes' (18 Jan. 1718). Kent was 'continualy a-drawing ornements & Archetecture ... things yt I think will be necessary for use in England' (15 Nov. 1718). On 18 December 1718 he was 'makeing all preperations I can to come for England next Spring', spending 'what little mony I have in prints & stucco figures as heads & feet etc, which will be of great use to me when I cannot see ye Antiques'.  Kent left Rome in the autumn of 1719 and waited for Sir William Wentworth (who had returned to Italy) at Florence; they parted at Genoa, where Kent met Lord Burlington, then on his second visit to Italy. He 'lik'd my designs so well, both painting & Archetecture, that he would make me promis at least to begin to paint for him the first when I come over' (15 Nov. 1719). Kent went on alone to Paris where he again waited for Lord Burlington, and in November they arrived back in London together, both intent upon overcoming 'that Dam'd Gusto thats been for this sixty years past' (15 Nov. 1719).
William Kent, the picture dealer, was in Italy 1758-60, apparently with his wife, buying for Sir Nathaniel Curzon of Kedleston. He was then in competition with Richard Dalton, who had no high opinion of him, telling Lord Bute that, having married an alderman's daughter with a large fortune, Kent had 'taken it into his head to turn dealer in both Pictures and Drawings and in my humble opinion, as he has not the least genius in yt way, will pay for his learning in ye end'.1  Eight of Kent's letters from Italy to Curzon provide some of his itinerary.2 From Venice on 15 August 1758 he wrote that he had already bought pictures by Van Dyck, Poussin, Maratti, Guido Reni, Annibale Carracci and 'Theodoro' [Helmbreker]-apparently on previous visits to Genoa and Florence3-and he mentioned a collection in Bologna [Sampieri] which Dalton was also trying to buy for Sir James Lowther; the correspondence includes a list of the pictures on offer. He was in Florence on 29 September, when he had 'lost' a collection 'at Gerrini's' [the Marchese Andrea Gerini] to Lady Orford, and an Abate had refused his offer for casts. Meanwhile he was treating for a bronze head of Alexander and, in secret, negotiating for the best pictures from the Arnaldi collection. On 2 October he was able to tell Curzon he need have no regrets over losing the Sampieri collection, since he had succeeded in buying (for £2,800) the best pictures from the marchese Arnaldi, who did not want it known; the pictures had once belonged to the marchese Niccolo Pallavicini in Rome. It appears that Dalton also took some of the Arnaldi pictures. Hayward listed Dalton and Kent in Florence 'buying up pictures' in 1758,4 and in August Horace Mann referred to 'those mighty bidders', Kent and Dalton, buying up the Arnaldi collection (from which Mann himself had just previously bought on commission works by Maratti and Gaspard Poussin).5  There was an active correspondence between Kent and Mann between March 1759 and April 1760, of which 28 letters from Mann have been listed.6 Kent's last letter from Florence is dated 11 [or 17] January 1759; he had been organising the dispatch of his purchases, which had been threatened by a flood, but only a large Goliath by Maratti was damaged. Kent also tried to buy from Mann a painting by Castiglione which Dalton ('a sad rogue') took back to England.7 His last surviving letter from Italy is from Naples on 20 May 1759; Curzon had not liked the Arnaldi 'Poussin' but, Kent protested, he had 'called in three of the ablest professors of the place who assured me of the originality of every one picture I sent you'. On 9 October 1759 Sir James Gray in Naples wrote to Mann returning a letter for Mr Kent, presumably the dealer, 'as he chose to leave Naples before the King embarked'.8 Winckelmann met Kent several times in Rome in 1760 and recorded his departure for Florence in June (due to his wife's insanity).9 He was was presumably the 'Anglois nommé Kent' who bought the Gabburri and Luti collections and sold them in London in 1760-1.10 In 1763 James Martin saw the picture collection of 'Mr Baurries' [Borri] in Florence and noted that 'many of the best' had been sold to 'one Mr Kent an Englishman'11 (Kent sold his Borri pictures at Langford's, 29-30 Mar. 1759). Early in 1761 Kent bought Stosch's collection of drawings in London.12

The Jacobite Dr Roger Kenyon wrote twice to the Earl of Mar from Rome in 1716 and was still there on 30 May 1717.1 'Dr Chenion' accompanied George Berkeley in Rome in January 1717.2 By July 1717 'Kennion' had been to Venice with Sir Francis Leicester.3
Keppel had chief command of the Mediterranean fleet in 1749-51 and Joshua Reynolds had sailed with him from Plymouth to Minorca in 1749.  Thirty-five years later, Keppel spent his last winter in Naples for the sake of his health. He had arrived by November 17851 and was about to leave in March 1786.2 He did not stay in Rome, where Henry Quin recorded seeing 'Lord Keppel and Miss Keppel' (presumably his natural daughter, Elizabeth, who m. Thomas Meyrick and d. 1828),4 and by the end of March the 10th Earl of Pembroke met him in Florence.3 By 30 June Keppel had left Leghorn 'a few weeks ago'.5 A portrait of him was once wrongly attributed to Batoni.6
Late in 1792 David Ker, a widower who had been married to a Venetian singer, went to spend nearly two years in Italy with his three young daughters, Sophia, Frances and Madelena, and their governess Mrs Sabonardière. They left Spa in September 1792 and the following month were in Florence, planning to settle for a year (29 Oct.).1 Robert Parker saw Ker in Florence in April 1793.2 In May 1793 Ker was asking for official introductions to the British ministers at Turin, Naples and Venice; in June he described the arrival of Prince Augustus and said that Florence was 'full of English, but mostly going to Switzerland, or homeward'. His three daughters sat to F.-X. Fabre (priv. coll.).  They arrived in Rome on 10 October and a week later (17 Oct.) Ker was offering his brother a choice of chimneypiece designs and proposing to sit for his portrait ('I must be taken in my bloom'); he was also pursuing two landscape commissions for his aunt from Gregorio Fidanza, 'the first Landscape Painter in Rome', who was teaching his daughter Sophie twice a week from 7 to 9 a.m. Sophie and her sisters were subject to a rigorous timetable; their lessons included languages, music, drawing, flower-making and perspective, practical geometry and architecture. Madelena played the violin 'an hour and a half a day', and Ker and their governess would also read Roman history to them in the afternoon-'by this varying they are never tired and all is a perpetual lesson in the Language'. Ker wrote that he had made 'an Italian servant we had at Florence a very good English Cook', and they were living comfortably in Rome.  On 26 October Ker was discussing a Leonardo da Vinci with one Mr Siriaz[?]. On 21 December he said he had obtained 'by a channel & particular circumstances' a Raphael portrait 'in his best manner', adding that he was going to send 'most of my acquisitions to Ireland'. Mrs Flaxman saw Ker and his family in Rome in November and December 1793.3 Ker sat to Angelica Kauffman (priv. coll.) on 15 November, making the final payment for his portrait on 25 March 1794.4 During February 1794 Sarah Bentham dined with them on three occasions.5 In April 1794 Ker had drawn up a list of pictures for Messrs Webb & Holmes at Leghorn for shipment to Dublin or Belfast, otherwise to London: three cases 'prepared against sea water' to be shipped from Leghorn, with three from Rome and another 'containing a Scagliola table will soon follow' (11 May 1794). On 14 May they were setting off for Switzerland; they were still in Lausanne on 7 September, but back in London by 20 October.
He came to Leghorn with the 2nd Duke of Argyll (who arrived on 15 February) and went off 'to make the tour of Italy'.1 On 9 March he was in Rome with Dr John Savage.2

Mr Carr and English' were received in Rome on 8 November 1704 by the Duke of Shrewsbury.1 English was John Inglis, physician to Queen Anne, and Carr was the Hon. William Ker, whose brother the Earl of Roxburghe had recently been made Secretary of State for Scotland. Their visit coincided with the Spanish Wars, but Carr was anxious, nonetheless, to reach Naples. On 22 November the Duke of Shrewsbury noted in his journal: '[Mr Carr] told me he thought he could procure a pass to go to Naples; that not only his curiosity but his health required it. I told him, in the last case, I could say nothing against it, and believed there was no danger. The greatest inconvenience appeared was what they might think in England, now that his brother was in the Ministry. He told me the Spa[nish] Embassador said that as he was a Scotchman he would grant it, but to no Englishman; which shows the hopes they flatter themselves with from Scotland.'1 On 25 January Ker and Inglis left for Naples.1 They were in Padua on 6 June.2 Ker was perhaps 'Mr Carr a Lord's son', who was said (in January 1706) to have received a Papal audience 'not many months since'.3

On graduating in 1771 Kerrich was awarded one of the Worts travelling scholarships from Cambridge University (£100 per annum for three years abroad, requiring monthly letters in Latin to the Vice-Chancellor with the traveller's observations).  He travelled with a friend, Daniel Pettiward of Fairfax House, Putney, and they had spent some months in Antwerp and Paris before coming to Italy. Kerrich met Thomas William Coke at Turin in 1772, and saw him frequently in Italy thereafter (as he described in letters partially published in 1908).1 He wrote from Florence on 31 January 1774 'in the height of ye Carnival, indeed it is so much, it would begin to grow tiresome if it continued much longer'; the Gallery [Uffizi] was open free for '5 or 6 hours together' and for less than sixpence one might attend the theatre and a Ball in the evening. Kerrich also described Horace Mann as 'one of ye most benevolent, friendly men I have ever met with.' Soon after, Kerrich was in Turin and Milan with Coke, their itinerary including a visit to the Borromean Islands.  It appears that they then returned to Rome. At some stage Kerrich sat to Batoni for an undated portrait (Clark/Bowron 379; priv. coll.), and in April 1774 Kerrich and Coke were in a party on a three-day excursion from Rome to Tivoli. They also shared an audience with the Pope, apparently at this time. In October 1774 Kerrich wrote from Rome to Coke (then back in England), describing at length the death and sympathetic character of Pope Clement XIV.  Kerrich had returned home by 1775, when he proceeded MA. A Self-portrait, 'drawn abroad by T. Kerrich 1774' (Christie's, 21 Mar. 1989), suggests that he knew the work of the Fuseli circle in Rome. In 1778 William Cole described Kerrich as 'a most ingenious painter' who 'was at Rome four years on a travelling fellowship'.2

Setting out as Lord Offaly and returning as the Marquess of Kildare, he described his travels to his mother in a series of spirited but youthful letters.1 One begins 'I am very sorry to be obliged to begin my letter by saying that it is time to finish' (8 Aug. 1767). Mr Bolle, a family retainer of over twenty years service, accompanied him, though his presence did not prevent frequent overspending and losses at the loo table.  Having spent some months in a military academy in Paris, he joined up with his uncle and aunt, Lord and Lady Holland, and his cousin Charles James Fox at Lyons. In October he sailed with Lord Holland and Fox from Marseilles to Naples (where they were joined by Lady Holland, Stephen Fox and his wife, Lady Mary) and where they spent the winter, see Henry, 1st Baron Holland. Kildare thought Naples very agreeable, though there were 'too many English' (26 Dec. 1766); in February there were forty (24 Feb. 1767). William Hamilton, 'a very civil and obliging man', introduced him to the sixteen-year-old King (Ferdinand IV) who was neither very bright, nor manly, handsome or tall (17 Nov. 1766), and whose coming of age celebrations Kildare attended in January 1767. Society ladies, he found, were essentially 'hideous', 'ungenteel' and 'very badly educated' (17 Nov. 1766). On 1 December 1766 he was able to end his letter 'Kildare, I may venture to sign'. He studied Italian, rode, fenced and drew fortifications, and sent home the first consignment of antiques, 'a box with some lava, snuff boxes and a bit of different sort of stuff that comes out of Vesuvius' (4 Apr. 1767). He had been sorry to learn that one could not take anything from Herculaneum (19 Jan. 1767). But he also played loo with Mrs Catherine Hamilton and, after Stephen Fox and his wife 'chose to make it deeper', Kildare 'generally lost' (3 Mar. 1767). An expedition to Sicily with Charles Fox was called off but, wrote Kildare, 'I am told by people who have been there that [it] is not worth the trouble of the journey' (10 Feb. 1767).  In March the group disbanded, Kildare travelling alone to Rome where he spent two months. For three hours each morning he went to see 'palazze and churches, etc, etc' (4 Apr. 1767) and he managed to find the Eternal City 'a rather dull place' (9 May 1767). The Pope was 'a very agreeable old man' whose toe, when he kissed it, 'was very sweet'; in the same letter (4 Apr. 1767) he told his mother of the two famous portrait painters in Rome, Batoni and 'Maron, a German, who is much cheaper - some people reckon much better'. Just before he left Rome he sent home a box of prints 'of some of the most famous pictures in Rome' with some books of antiquities (3 Jun. 1767). He left on 7 June, apparently with Lord Robert Spencer, travelling via Terni ('a prodigious fine waterfall ... there falls more water than at Powerscourt'; 14 Jun. 1767) to Florence, where Charles Fox rejoined him in August. He thought Horace Mann 'the greatest old woman I ever met with' (20 Jun. 1767), but the Grand Duke was 'a civil, well-bred, amiable young man' (27 Jun. 1767). Again he discovered an 'astonishing' number of 'ugly women' (20 Jun.) and he managed to lose more money playing loo with the Countess of Mahony (4 Jul. 1767). Early in September he visited Lucca and spent a month in Leghorn, where he found people from all nations speaking all languages. In Florence he ordered for his mother some vases (22 Aug. 1767), later called Volterra (i.e. alabaster) and finally Etruscan; they arrived, broken, in Ireland in July 1768. He was in Turin by the beginning of November having travelled up from Florence with Fox (who went on to France). He studied and drew the fortifications and was presented to Charles Emmanuel III, King of Sardinia, who hunted enthusiastically at the age of sixty-seven. On 17 November he told his mother that he had 'grown fonder of reading than I used to be' and the new habit 'had almost broke me of that bad trick I had of dawdling away my time.' In December Kildare went to Nice to stay with Lord and Lady Holland. Kildare returned to Turin in January 1768 with the 5th Earl of Carlisle (whom ultimately he did not greatly like). He again resolved to study, although the Carnival 'caused some little irregularity' to his discipline (3 Feb. 1768). After the Carnival, he wrote, the topics of conversation changed from music, singing and dancing to 'which church [had] the best sermon' (24 Feb. 1768). On 2 March one of his servants ('who had enjoyed his master's good opinion') committed suicide.2 At the end of March he made a brief visit to Genoa with Thomas Potter and Carlisle; he was back in Turin in April and stayed there through the summer. In July he was briefly joined by Lord Fitzwilliam, Fox and Uvedale Price: 'we are about ten English at present, and eight of us were at Eton together. It is amazing how one picks up our old Eton acquaintances abroad. I dare say I have met above forty since I have been in Italy' (13 Jul. 1768). The same letter contained the remarkable news that, commended for his sagesse, he was being considered for a post in the embassy.  In September he spent a week in the country which he described as comprising breakfast, a walk, cards until dinner, dinner, cards, walk, coffee and cards, a regimen he found 'very agreeable and pleasant' (17 Sep. 1768). By 17 September he was in Milan a 'horrid ugly town', where he met the Duke of Modena who was 'upwards of sixty years of age, and wears a wig with about a 100 curls, and wears rouge, and adorns his forehead with white'; but then a visit to Lake Maggiore with Sir Watkin Williams Wynn and William Hamilton was 'beyond description' (17 Sep. 1768). On 12 October he was in Venice: 'I arrived a few days ago', he told his mother; 'I can't say much but its being curious to recommend it, as [it] seems to be the most disagreeable place I ever was in', and he added that his servant Bolle was 'very happy to get out of Italy; and I may venture to say that nothing will persuade him to return'. In November 1768 he was in Vienna. To judge by his letters, Kildare was not the most sensitive traveller, but at least he was able to report towards the end of his travels that 'it is amazing how much wider I am upon the chest ... My legs also are fine ... [and] I do not grow fat, which is a comfort' (14 May 1768).
A midwife sent out to attend the Duchess of Gloucester (who gave birth in Rome on 18 January 1776), Mrs Killgore was to take 'a little bronze figure' from Thomas Patch in Florence to Charles Townley in London.1 .
Colonel Richard, Mr Killigrew, Major of the Regiment of the Queen's Dragoons' was with General Earle at Milan in January 1708.1 Killigrew was aide-de-camp to the 2nd Duke of Argyll when he arrived at Leghorn on 12 February 1712.2

Lord Kilmorey was living in Siena in May 1750,1 and in August 1751 Lord and Lady 'Killmurrey' were in Florence with her brother-in-law, Joseph Nightingale and his son and daughter. The Kilmoreys followed the Nightingales to Rome in October.2 Kilmorey was listed among the sponsors of the British Academy in Rome (see Charlemont) in 1752.3  Kilmorey was again in Florence in June 1753,4 but it is unclear whether he remained in Italy until 1755 when he and Lady Kilmorey were at Rome. 'Milord Chimere' and 'Mada sua moge' were living near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1755,5 and called on Robert Adam in May (Lady Kilmorey caressing him, said Adam, 'as if I had been her own son').6 They left Rome in July, travelling back to Turin with Count Girolamo Colloredo, son of the Austrian Vice-Chancellor, and were then to proceed home.7 On 20 March 1759 they were issued with passports in Florence, to travel home through Switzerland, Germany and Holland.8
Poor and desperate, his debauches and extravagances having left him nothing but title', Lord Kilsyth lived at the exiled Stuart court on the Pretender's bounty from 1717.1 He was in Parma, en route for Bologna, on 10 March 1717,2 and later that month he was among many exiled Jacobites who arrived in Venice 'from Florence'.3 In July he was one of several who, disagreeing over the presentation of Princess Clementina Sobieska in Rome, were going to 'other touns in Italie, whence, they say, they are to goe to France'.4 He was listed in Italy in December 1717,5 and was with the Stuart court in Urbino in March 1718.6 In 1721 Rawlinson recorded that Kilsyth had broken his leg in a fall;7 in April 1728 Stosch noted he had left Rome for Bologna, and in July 1729 that he had again arrived in Rome,8 where he died on 12 January 1733.
King is said to have been in Italy with Daniel Wray and James Douglas from 1722,1 see Wray. In January 1728 he had certainly arrived in Rome with Francis Godolphin. In March he was reported to have left Naples for Sicily and Malta with Lord Lovelace and Hugh Barlow; he was about to leave Messina with Lovelace for Malta in April, and on 16 September he had left [Italy?] for France.2 He was sometime in Florence with John Dixon.3
Mr King, a Jew, the author of the letters signed Neptune and of a most scurrilous libel against Fox', left his wife and three children to marry Lady Lanesborough, a widow. They had lived 'sometime' at Leghorn by 1785 when King's first wife arrived with two of their children on 17 August. King first took out 'as it is called, the privileges of the free port of Leghorn, which protects him against any prosecution for all crimes committed before, out of this state', but then, it appears, went through a Jewish divorce at Leghorn.1  One of Lady Lanesborough's daughters, Sophia, married the marchese Luigi Marescotti in 1787. On 2 January 1787 Emma Hart said that he and Lady Lanesborough left a number of debts behind them ('innumerable villanys') as they left Naples.2 The World Fashionable Advertiser, 5 February 1787, listing English visitors to Naples gave 'One King-a Jew / And last, though not least in some things - Lady Lanesborough'. They were pilloried as 'the degenerate Countess' and 'the Fugitive Israelite'.3 King and Lady Lanesborough appear to have stayed in Italy; both died in Florence, he in August 1823 and she on 1 January 1828. Lady Lanesbborough was buried in the Leghorn cemetery, her gravestone making no mention of John King.4
King was in Florence with a Mr Malone, Talbot (presumably Thomas Mansell Talbot) and a Mr Leighton by 21 October 1769.1 They were all to be presented to the Grand Duke at Florence on 29 October 1769.2 'Pietro King' arrived in Venice on 15 May 1770 with 'William Talbo' and 'Tomaso Tuiden'[?].3
Lord King was travelling with a Mr Coote [possibly Chidley Coote]. They arrived in Venice on 5 February from Trieste with 'Giovan Bolen'[?],1 and on the 14th they proceeded via Verona2 and Brescia3 to Milan, where they were observed by Lady Berwick. 'Ld K is handsome seems what he shd be for a Boy of his age about 19', she wrote, while Mr Coote was 'extremely shy'; they never went out at all, and stayed only a week; they were to pass the summer in Switzerland and intended for Rome the next winter.4
Mrs King was in Naples in May 1768 'very lively and very pretty', said Lord Carlisle, 'and as great a flirt as myself'.1 Mr and Mrs King were in Venice for a few days in October; they were both Irish, said Lord Kildare, she 'a very agreeable woman' who had been at Spa.2 A Mrs King, possibly the same, was in Rome in November that year.3


Kingsman was listed in Florence on 31 October 1772, giving an accademia di suono.1 On 21 November he was in Capua, on his way to Naples.2 By February 1773 he had been painted by Collopy in Naples and was shortly going to Rome with 'Madame Tenducci [Tanucci?]'.3 He was probably the Thomas 'Kinsman' who arrived in Venice with his wife in 21 May 1773.4
A very weak man, of the greatest beauty' (according to Horace Walpole), he travelled in Italy with a tutor, Nathan Hickman (and a W. Cotton). He was in Venice with the Duke of Norfolk in December 1730, expected 'shortly' in Rome.1 He spent most of 1731 in Lyons 'with a large retinue', and recrossed the Alps, with Joseph Spence and Lord Middlesex (later 2nd Duke of Dorset), in October; he then spent a week in Milan before going on to Genoa.2 He was in Florence for two weeks until 15 December, when he left for Rome.3 He had then been expected in Venice, Elizeus Burges writing that the Duke 'proposes to stay but 6 months in Italy; so he runs through as many places as he can before he comes hither'.4 But the Duke came back from Rome in time to see 'ye last three daies' of the Carnival in Venice, before setting out through Padua5 for Paris. 'He seems very little taken with any thing he has seen in Italy', Burges commented,6 although both the Duke and Dr Hickman were later said to have shown interest in engravings in Florence.7
That pompous piece of effrontery and imposture, the Duchess of Kingston',1 first arrived in Rome in January 1774. Following the death of her second husband, the Duke, whose considerable real estate she had inherited, she was threatened by an action from Augustus Hervey, her first husband. Their secret marriage of 1744 had never been publicly acknowledged or legally terminated, and Hervey wished to remarry but the discovery of a previous marriage would invalidate her succession to the Duke's estate. In Rome the Duchess, shunned by English society, displayed signs of piety.2 In deep mourning, she showed regard for the poor Irish Franciscans and was presented to the Pope. Cardinal Albani lent her the Villa Albani though, as it had no garden, she feared it would not do.3 She hoped to purchase the Villa Negroni, offering some £16,000, but the deal had fallen through by August.4 Horace Mann said she was learning Russian and had a band of music with her, and Father Thorpe observed that she bought a 'great number of wretched paintings'. She returned briefly to England in the summer, passing through Florence and Genoa in May.5  She was in London for a day early in July 1774, fleeing when she heard that the Duke of Kingston's will was being disputed by his nephew. It had in any case been her intention to return to Italy for the winter and probably for the rest of her life.6 She was back in Rome by November 1774,7 bringing with her in her beautiful yacht, the Minerva, 'a shipload of plunder' from the Kingston estates.8 Early in December she received with La Maréchale de los Balbazes (sister to the Constable Colonna) 'visits from the Roman Ladies', and was then going to 'live with all her retinue in the Palace of the Rufo ... which the Prelate who is the Owner, has given the use'. She was furnishing it with the treasure she had brought out from England, which, wrote Thorpe, was 'permitted to enter without paying any duty'; the Romans, Thorpe continued, 'expect a Carnaval in her; she already begins the Masquerade, for she has got a white bear skin for her Coach box ... & her Servants mourning is new trimmed with silver which makes them look like so many Pantalones'.9 In January 1775 she was 'bewailing her fate in Rome', and in March she returned to London to face the charge of bigamy; she left her treasures in Rome in the care of the Pope, and passed through Florence on 6 March 1775.10  In April 1775 the Court of Chancery referred her case to the House of Lords, whereupon she assembled a second cargo of riches from the Kingston estates for Civitavecchia.11 In April 1776 she was found guilty of bigamy by the Lords and, hearing that the Duke's nephews were to bring an action against her over the will, she quickly escaped to France. She was to spend most of her remaining life in France and Russia. Although she was expected back in Rome in November 1776, she did not appear and her apartments in Rufo's palace were re-let in February 1777.12 Her last visit took place in July 1778 when she sailed from Calais to Leghorn in seventeen days, in order to fetch her treasure from Rome.13 She was still there on 15 September, but had left by October, having had 'sad broils' with the custodians.14 On her death in 1788 she still had many valuables in Rome, and she made bequests to the Pope and to the Abbé Filateri.15
Described by Lord Forbes of Pitsligo as a very honest and warm man,3 Lord Kingston was setting out for Rome in June 1717 and was listed in Italy in December;1 on 13 June 1718 he was in Padua.2 He was living in Rome in November 1718 (CP).



Charles Kinaird was seen listening to 'music at D. Livio's' on 4 January 1702.1 'Mr Kenar' called on the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome on 20 April 1702.2 'Charles Kinnaird Scotus' was in Padua on 18 December 1705.3
My Lord Cainard' left Venice for 'Milan, Genoa, Luca &c.' early in October 1710, but was expected back for the Carnival.1 He was in Padua on 3 October2 and in Lucca early in December, lodging with a Mr Jackson. On 9 December they went with John Bellings to look at some of the villas around Lucca.3 A year later Charles Baldwyn described him in Lucca as 'an honest ingenious Scotch Lord', who 'has chose this place of quiet, and [is] learning the Language, for a year'.4 In January 1713 Lord 'Keinard' left Naples for Rome.5



Following his joint appointment with his father as Clerk of the Works at the Richmond and Kew Palaces, William Kirby was sent to Italy to study architecture at the King's expense. Hayward noted 'Mr Kirby Architect & Wife' in Rome in 1768,1 and there are architectural drawings by him at Windsor of Roman subjects of 1769 and 1770, two dated Jan 1769 and Feb 7 1769. Mrs Margaret Forbes recorded meeting Mr and Mrs Kirby in Rome in a letter of 13 September 1769 and she mentioned a Mrs Kirby in Rome in another letter of 25 December 1769.2 On their return Kirby was given a house at Kew and his wife was made house-keeper at Richmond Lodge. He died at Kew in July 1771.
-c.1682-1710 Genoa (-d. Jan. 1710)He was English consul in Genoa from at least 16821 until his death in January 1710;2 he welcomed the Duke of Shrewsbury on 11 September 1701.3
Thomas Kirkpatrick Scotus' was in Padua with Andrew Wauchope and George Waddell (presumably his tutor) on 23 November 1725.1 Stosch reported that 'Sir Thomas Kilpatrick', probably the same, had left Rome by 15 May 1726, having shown some attachment to the Jesuits,2 and an anonymous letter from a Jacobite, dated Rome, 21 June 1726, said that 'Mr Waddel and his Companion [possibly Kirkpatrick] left us some time ago'.3

It was said he travelled on foot to Rome, where he was employed in the puchasing of pictures. On his return to Dublin he held an exhibition of these pictures in William Street (A. Pasquin, Memoirs of the Royal Academicians and an Authentic History of the Artists of Ireland... [1796], 21).N. F.
Knapton was in Rome with Arthur Pond in 1725. In the spring he received a letter (from Thomas Edwards) conveying messages to Pond, and discussing the export from Italy of plaster casts from the antique.1 They met Daniel Wray and James Douglas in Rome.1 P.L. Ghezzi made a caricature of 'Monsieur Knapton Pittore Inglese' in Rome in 1726. Knapton was in Rome in the summer of 1732,2 and in Padua on 3 June.3 He returned to England later that year after seven years in Italy.4 A view of the Falls at Terni 'by George Knapton, taken from the spot' (London art market 1962) seems to be the only recorded Italian work by him. His account of Herculaneum, contained in a letter to his brother Charles, was published in 1740 by the Royal Society.5

A young Gentleman of an ancient family, & very considerable Estate in the County of Kent', Sir Wyndham undertook the grand tour with his tutor Louis Devisme. In July 1758 they were in Padua, where they met Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. She then wrote that they intended to go on to Rome and Naples and commented that 'there is so much pains taken to make [Sir Wyndham] despise Instruction, I fear he will not long resist the aluremants of pleasures which his Constitution cannot support.'1 They were in Florence in August and were introduced to Horace Mann through a letter from William Pitt; Mann in turn introduced them to Cardinal Albani, whom they had met in Rome by 18 November.2 In December they visited Jonathan Skelton and admired his work,3 and Sir Wyndham sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 218; priv. coll.). When this portrait was finished after his departure Winckelmann told Stosch that it was 'one of the best in the world'.4 The architect Robert Mylne was sketching for him in December.5 In April 1759 they were back in Venice, where they again met Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who again praised Sir Wyndham as 'one of the most modest, well dispos'd young Men I have known abroad', and when he and his tutor went their separate ways from Venice in May she wrote that Knatchbull Wyndham 'would have been happy in a Companion that sincerely lov'd him and study'd his Interest'.6 Sir Wyndham was still on his travels in March 1760 but was brought back for the Parliamentary election in June.7



After the death of her husband, 'a brave officer that served his country 52 years', Lady Knight was left without a pension and 'finding that she could not live in London with that propriety which she had at heart, made up her mind to go abroad, with the intention of remaining three years on the Continent'.1 With her nineteen-year-old daughter Cornelia, she set off to spend a year in France before arriving in Rome on 9 March 1777; Italy was to be their principal home for the next twenty-two years. They were a distinctive couple, both oddly dressed, strait-laced and clever, rather resentful of their circumstances. 'I am a happy, happy mother, in having my daughter a faithful friend', wrote Lady Knight in 1790; 'we have always lived in the best company and not inelegantly, though with a severe economy in our table and by my daughter's being the milliner and I the mantua-maker, stay-maker and workwoman. We make dress but a small part of our expenses, and we really spend about a tenth part of what our country persons do, yet we can not sometimes help regretting the hard fate we have had'.2  In her letters to Mrs Drake (a sympathetic and more fortunate cousin), Lady Knight stressed her enforced frugality. 'I am sure few persons in the world have preserved independence upon so small a pittance, or are more clearly of pecuniary obligations' she wrote after fifteen years in Italy (Mar. 1793). In 1778, nine months after leaving Toulouse, they had spent just £250, and Rome was 'the cheapest city in the world and the most beautiful' (29 Oct. 1778). She consistently quoted the rental for their various apartments. After first lodging by the Piazza di Spagna, she took rooms at £36 a year (the entrance 'in the second-best street of Rome, and my drawing room looks upon the very best [the Corso]' (15 May 1778); in March 1779 they moved to Castel Gandolfo (six months for £7.10s; 3 Mar. 1779); returning to Rome on 27 March 1780 they had apartments near the Barberini Palace at £14.10 per year with £35 for furniture (9 May 1780), and with the use of the Barberini and Villa Sciarra gardens (20 Jun. 1780); by October 1781 they were lodged in the centre of Rome, opposite the famous column of Antoninus, at about £18 per year (21 Oct. 1781); in Genoa in 1790 they had 'a little habitation that I furnished' for £11 a year (2 May 1790), and then had a house on a hill outside the city for £5 (ibid.); their final accommodation in Rome was a suite of eight rooms on the Campo Carleo near the Corso at about £12 a year; in London, Lady Knight observed, 'they would cost us at least two hundred per annum' (7 Jun. 1791). But while Lady Knight advertised her economy, she was also at pains to assert her propriety and to demand respect from society. Cardinal de Bernis and the Prince of Palestrina were particularly kind to them and when the Prince let them use his palace at Palestrina she emphasised that this was 'much beyond that of Hampton Court' (20 Jun. 1782). In Naples, where they spent a year from May 1785, the Queen and Sir William and Lady Hamilton were 'very attentive', but in the end 'the hours were so late and the generality so dissipated' that they decided to move on, back to the south of France. When they came to Genoa in 1790 they were 'under the protection of persons of the first fashion' (2 May 1790); they were 'very generally known', and partook 'of most that goes forward, but I do not pursue gaieties daily and nightly as some of our acquaintance do' (29 Nov. 1790); 'books are very little read; the whole business of life is money-getting' (19 Mar. 1791).  Thomas Brand observed another side of her character when he met her in Genoa. He thought she had lived there long enough: 'she has found out every body's good and bad qualities & I believe in return they have found out hers and if once she quarrels with any of them it is all over'.3 The Knights left Genoa 'when the intrigues of the revolutionary government of France rendered this city an undesirable residence for English families'.4 In Rome in 1791 Mesdames Adelaide and Victoire, the exiled aunts of Louis XVI, were behaving 'with great prudence and civility to everybody, and have been particularly kind to us' (7 Sep. 1791); 'we generally make our visits [to them] once a week, except when we have either too many to make or illness prevents us' (Mar. 1793). At this time the Knights were receiving twice a week 'from eight or nine to twenty persons' but there being only conversation, guests were not always anxious to attend (ibid.). Her approval of the young Prince Augustus gave way to criticism after his ill-judged marriage: 'a tender heart combined with ignorance of the ways of the world has been his misfortune' (19 Apr. 1795), and an incident with Robert Fagan, one of the Prince's favoured artists, at a ball at Lady Plymouth's, led to an affront from the Prince, as it was construed, and the exclusion of the Knights from his circle (ibid.). Lady Knight, as Thomas Brand commented, was 'ever getting herself into scrapes & yet keeping her head above water. She is very violent on all political occasions. It is well her principles are so just & honorable or we should have work indeed'.5 Lady Webster once observed in the Capitoline in Rome 'an old witch, by Salvator Rosa, which might easily be mistaken for a portrait of Lady Knight'.6 'It's said that in this city eight thousand artists from different nations are constantly employed' wrote Lady Knight from Rome (15 May 1778), but her involvement with the fine arts was peripheral. The Knights collected in a fashion, picking up 'things, marbles, very cheap; but most that we have were gifts. The working of fine marbles is very dear, or I should be tempted to have many made up' (20 Jun. 1780). Thomas Jenkins, whose nephews acted as bankers for the Knights, was a friend and they stayed in his country house at Castel Gandolfo (18 Nov. 1780, 21 Oct. 1781). Lady Knight had known Angelica Kauffman in England and 'we have always been very intimate with her' (23 Aug. 1793); she painted Cornelia's portrait in Rome in 1793 (Manchester AG).  Cornelia meanwhile was reading, writing and drawing, Cardinal de Bernis particularly attending her needs (11 Jul. 1778). According to her mother she had made 550 drawings and paintings by May 1781, and 1800 drawings-'some with the pen, but mostly coloured ones, the former from imagination, the latter from nature'-by May 1790. The same letter announced that Cornelia was learning Swedish as a tenth language. Thomas Brand at this time considered that Cornelia had 'grown thin & has alter'd in her person a great deal for the worse'.3 In 1792 Cornelia had published in London Flaminius, a view of the Military, Social and Political Life of the Romans, a didactic romance in the form of letters, which Brand considered would be 'as immortal as Livy, Tacitus, Horace, etc.'7 It was followed in 1793 by Dinarbus (a continuation of Johnson's Rasselas); Bodoni in Parma printed her lines celebrating Lord Cornwallis's victory over Tipoo Sahib [1793] and a sonnet on Cardinal de Bernis's death, On the Amphitheater of Vespasian at Rome [1794]. Cornelia corresponded with Bodoni between 1792 and 1795.8 In 1794 she presented Lord and Lady Bruce to the Duke and Duchess of Cesi (13 Nov. 1794). Her mother was very proud of her: 'It's a loss to her country that necessity obliges us to be removed from it ... Her learning is very profound, and at the same time very general ... but what avail her talents or services? Fifty-eight years her father was a great and good servant of the public, and his widow and orphan -' (Mar. 1793).  Lady Knight's opinion of the Italians mellowed over the years. In 1778 she disdainfully wrote that they were 'I believe, a very worthless set of people, but very few worth knowing. The ladies dress most horribly, like strolling players, and have as many shining stones around them as the waxworks in Fleet Street' (15 May 1778). Nor did she discover Roman gravitas: 'Matters and follies that a peasant in England would be ashamed of are here the entertainments of the highest rank. I believe there are in Rome more revels than in any other city in the world. To its treasures ... all nations must bow, but it's from those who visit it only you can hope to meet with society or sense or knowledge. There is hardly such a thing as a native learned in either arts or sciences. As for friendship, they have not the occasion for such a word in their language, so it's useless' (29 Oct. 1778). But fifteen years later she was writing that the Italians were 'a very sensible, agreeable people', and Rome 'a cheap and friendly home; from the highest down to the lowest persons ... they are ready to show us esteeem and courtesy' (Mar. 1793). By 1794 Lady Knight was not enjoying good health: 'I am afraid she cannot last very long. Her wonderful spirits carry her through everything', said Thomas Brand.9 But she and her daughter stayed on in Rome up to the French invasion in February 1798. They escaped, with some difficulty, to Naples and when the French threatened that city they were able to sail to Palermo (on the Alliance) at the same time as the King and Queen of Naples, arriving on 1 January 1799.10 There Lady Knight died on 20 July 1799, having commended her daughter to the protection of Sir William and Lady Hamilton.11 Cornelia finally arrived in England on 9 November 1800 with the Hamiltons and Lord Nelson.
Knight made two visits to Italy as a young man, while Downton Castle was being built. Of the first his autobiography simply records that he made 'the Tours of France and Italy in the years 1772 and 1773'.1 He was in Calais on 25 September 1772 writing to his site agent; he asked for a reply to be directed to Florence, but it was sent to Rome.2 He was possibly the Mr Knight in Capua on 15 March 1773, going to or coming from Naples.3  On his second visit to Italy he set out with J.R. Cozens, who made a number of drawings for him in Switzerland. By November 1776 they were in Rome. On 24 November Knight was writing to George Romney concerning the passions in art4 and in December he was 'admiring and collecting virtu'.5 He met the German painter Philipp Hackert and his wealthy English pupil Charles Gore, both of whom were interested in topography and archaeology, and on 12 April 1777 the three left Naples together to make a tour of Sicily. Knight compiled a careful and learned journal Expedition into Sicily (Goethe-Schiller archiv, Weimar), for which Gore and Hackert provided illustrations (BMPL).6 They sailed to Paestum where Knight observed of the Doric temples that from close to they appeared 'rude, massive, heavy: but seen at a proper distance, the general effect is grand, simple and even elegant'. They sailed on to Porto Palionuro which they left on 22 April, and arrived in Sicily on the 25th. They were arrested as spies at Patti (the depiction of Sicilian territory was then forbidden without the permission of the King of Naples), but Hackert explained that they were 'dilettanti who travelled only for amusement'. They examined the 'stupendous' ruins at Selinus and at Agrigento Knight commented on the awful discrepancy between ancient grandeur and modern poverty. On 27 May they ascended Mount Etna: 'I felt myself elevated above humanity, & looked down with Contempt upon the mighty objects of Ambition under me', Knight wrote. The party left Messina on 6 June, Knight assessing the Sicilians as 'averse to labor and prone to pleasure, & superstition'. In July they returned to Rome, where Cozens worked up many of the illustrations into finished watercolours. Knight was in Paris in the winter of 1777 and is thought to have returned to England in 1778.
Robert Knight fled to Paris in 1720 upon the collapse of the South Sea Company, of which he was the cashier. In April 1722 he was said to be in Venice under an assumed name,1 and later that month Rawlinson met him in Padua, considering him to be 'a man of good sence. His banishment from his country, and the circumstances of his affairs putt a gloom and melancholy on him too visible, and often the consequence of a disturbed or guilty mind: he had no companion with him, and about eleven sett out in a hired bask for Venice'.2 In October 1722 Knight's son (Robert) was coming from Naples to Rome, where he was waiting for his father to come from Genoa.3

Sigre Cave. Ridolfo Knight di Londra' was elected to the Accademia del Disegno in Florence on 9 August 1734.1 He was possibly the Mr Knight of Nottinghamshire travelling with Sir Thomas Twisdale [Twisden] from Turin to Florence in November 1733;2 the Mr Knight met by Pococke in Florence in January 1734 who soon after went on to Rome,3 and the Knight who left Florence with Gore on 27 October 1734 for Bologna and Venice.4 'R. Knight' was in Padua on 3 March 1735.5 A Mr Knight was elected to the Society of Dilettanti in 1737.



A Mr Knightley was in Capua on 29 April 1772 with Damer (probably Lionel Damer), and he was in Naples the following month.1 Valentine Knightley was in Florence in January and February 1773 (innaccurately called 'Mr Knightley the Youngest Brother'), and he appears in Zoffany's Tribuna (Windsor), the portrait said to be 'exactly him'.2  On 15 June 1773 a Mr Knightley delivered to Horace Mann letters from Horace Walpole dated between 15 January 1771 and 12 March 1773;3 this must have been another Knightley, conceivably the youngest of the four brothers, Charles (c.1754-87; the other brothers being Lucy, 1742-91, and John, 1747-1812, cr. Bt. 1798). Patrick Home listed a Mr W. Knightley among the people he met in Italy (c.1772?).4


The 'Ill.mo Se. Knox Gentiluomo Irlandese' was elected to the Accademia del Disegno, Florence, on 14 July 1765.1 He may have been the person mentioned as serving on the committee of the Accademia degli Armonici in 1775, who had apparently lived in Florence for some time.2



Lafevre'/'Lefevre' was among the group of Englishmen whom George Sinclair met in Naples and Rome in March 1738 (Sinclair jnl.MSS, 2, 11 Mar.).


A merchant first noticed in 1704 in Leghorn,1 where he died in January 1719.2
The brothers Lambert, travelling with a W. Woolfe attended the Carnival at Venice and came to Padua on 17 February1 with Nicholas Wogan, Lucius Cary and Simon Degge. The Lamberts arrived in Rome with 'Wolf' on 26 February.2



A portrait by Marcus Tuscher of John Lambert, dated Livorno 1733 (Copenhagen) may show the same person.
One of the richest private gentlemen in England', and a man of radical convictions, Lambton set out for Italy with his young family in the summer of 1796. It was not politically an easy time for Italian travel, but Lambton was probably seeking a cure for the consumption of which he was to die the following year. They sailed to Naples where they were in quarantine on 25 October.1 On 12 January 1797 Lambton witnessed the marriage of Elizabeth Wynne to Captain Fremantle, and they were all dining with the King and Queen of Naples at Caserta on 9 February.2 Later that month Lambton was sitting with his family to the German painter Augusto Nicodemo, and Eugenia Wynne thought she had never seen 'anything so pretty and so much like'.3 The picture, dated Naples 1797 (Christie's, 22 Apr. 1983), shows four children, the fourth presumably being the boy, Hedworth, who was born in Naples on 26 March 1797 (the others being John, 1792-1840, William, 1793-1824, and Frances). Lambton also bought eight horses which William Hamilton was trying to export early in June.4 By then the Lambtons were in Rome. A Mr Manby [possibly the Rev. John Manby] was then looking for a Robinson Crusoe for the Lambton children who were just beginning to read.5 'Guntatarde', an artist described as 'brother of the language master', was teaching Lambton's wife, Lady Anne.6 Lambton sat to Alexander Day for a miniature portrait,7 and to Angelica Kauffman (Sotheby's, 13 Apr. 1994), as did his small daughter Frances as Psyche (Anderson and Garland, 18 Apr. 1932). William Artaud thought the Psyche did not look like the child, but Angelica's whole-length portrait of Lambton was 'the best resemblance there has been done of him; still, it fails of his true phisianomical character. An attempt at softening the features and giving a certain kind of prettiness ever destroys in my opinion, the energy of her Male portraits'. Artaud, whom Lambton had met in Naples, became his regular guest and acted as his cicerone.7 Lambton also commissioned four drawings of Rome from the Swiss artist Franz Kaisermann, and two from Guntatarde; a historical drawing from 'Fredrigo the German', and a painting of Mother of the Gracchi and her Children from Vincenzo Camuccini. John Deare was asked for a chimneypiece for Lambton's library, while Artaud himself was commissioned to copy three portraits (of Raphael, Perugino and Macchiavelli), and to paint a portrait of the Lambton infant, Hedworth (whom he painted from the front and back with a guardian angel above), and a subject from Erasmus Darwin's Love of the Plants, Liberty tearing away the veils of Ignorance and Superstition (VAM).8 On 25 October Lambton exported twelve paintings from Rome, seven landscapes, three portraits and two histories.9  By October Lambton's health was visibly declining, Artaud observing that his life was 'a continual series of efforts to render those around him happy'.10 The family moved to Pisa, where he died on 30 November; he was buried in the Protestant cemetery in Leghorn.11 John Deare was to provide designs for a simple monument.8

A 'Mademoiselle Mattieu, figlia di Milord Landoff' was also in Venice in September 1790 (ASV is 761).
He retired with his family to Leghorn, where he died in 1792. His wife Mary (b. c.1734) died there in 1790 and his married daughter Mary Anne (Mrs Ragueneau, b. c.1757) in 1793 (Leghorn Inscr., 38, 40-1).


Mr Viscount Langford e Mr [Thomas] Lyon Inglesi' arrived in Venice on 12 July 1792.1  Lord Langford and Lion [Lyon] were listed at Rome (probably retrospectively) on 6 July 1794.2 From 4 May 1794 to at least 7 June 'Lord Langford Inglese Nobile', Mr Lyon and his daughter and a 'Madama Madagan' [Maclagan] were in Venice, having travelled together from Rome3 ('Madagan' also called 'Mr' and otherwise spelt 'Maclagan' or 'Malgugan').
The brother of Sir William Langhorne,1 in 1708 he was living in Genoa,2 where he died in May 1713.1


Son of a Leghorn merchant, Benjamin Langlois had presumably spent part of his childhood in Italy. In 1756 he had accompanied Lord Stormont to Warsaw, where they were joined by Lord Titchfield in 1757. In August 1759 Titchfield and Langlois were to go together to Turin, but they were in Berlin in January 1760.1 In November 1760 Lord Titchfield had 'been long at Turin',2 presumably with Langlois. In 1767 'Cav.Langlois, royal secretary of his Britannic Majesty' arrived in Florence from Leghorn on 14 March.3
In February 1747 he was involved in a fracas with a French officer in a theatre at Leghorn, as a result of which he was imprisoned in Florence.1 He was presumably the 'Christofano Langlois' who came from Mantua to Verona on 30 April 1743 with Richard Sally, Thomas Price and George Dowdeswell, and was detained in the lazzaretto until 16 May.2 He doubtless maintained his father's business in Leghorn, where James Martin recorded visiting a Mr Langlois in 1763.3
In Florence in November 1751 he was briefly the cicisbeo ('whom the town thought unworthy') of Madame Acciajuoli.1 He was presumably the 'Giovanni Langlois', merchant in Leghorn, recorded in March 1743 and May 1744,2 and the 'John Angloes' recorded living in Florence in 1751.3
One of the first Huguenots to settle in Leghorn, he established the firm of Langlois & Sons.1 He died in Leghorn (where his wife had died in 1727) on 9 October 1737 and was buried in the Leghorn cemetery.2 His daughter Elisabeth married Anthony Lefroy in 1738 in Leghorn.
Langton spent a year in Italy which ended with his death in Rome on 2 September 1738.1 An unpretentious young country squire from Brecon, his travelling companions were a Mr Herbert and a Mr Pryse, and they were later joined by a Mr Breedon and a Mr Lucas. After travelling through France they came to Italy in October 1737, the crossing of Mont Cenis being 'easy & agreable, ye Rudeness & Steepness of our Road [serving] only to fill ye mind wth a pleasing Horrour' (10 Oct.). Such composure is typical of Langton's diary (Langton Jnl.), which provides his itinerary and is filled with scrupulous observation. He was critical of previous accounts of Italy, Breval's requiring too much 'Patience & Leisure', and Addison's being 'superficial & incorrect'. Yet he admitted that the Duke of Savoy's collection in Turin was the first 'Collection of ys kind I ever pd any Attention to in my Life' (10 Oct.) and he left the journal unattended for two months in Rome and three weeks in Naples.  Langton was not impressed by a 'Foolish Function' in Genoa for the canonisation of St Catherine of Genoa, and thought that the 'Common People of ys Country have an astonishing Degree of Brutality'. He had been much harrassed by postillions, inn-keepers and coaching accidents. Late in December in Florence, Herbert, Breedon and Lucas left him for Rome, while he stayed on 'not satisfy'd with so small a view of ye Beauties of ys City'. His journal ends with Langton returning alone to Naples on 12 June 1738. George Sinclair had seen him in Rome on 8 March,2 and on Langton's tomb in the Protestant cemetery in Rome there appear the names of Lancelot Allgood and Edwin Lascelles, doubtless the companions of his final days.

He was probably the 'Lascielly' in Rome at Easter 1795, living in the Strada Felice.1 Charles Lascelles came to Padua from Venice on 15 December 1795, on his way to Bologna.2  A 'Routtleng Lancelles' came to Venice on 20 November 1795 from Switzerland and was still there on 19 December.3


He may be identified with the 'David Touch' who passed through Capua on 23 September 1753,1 and he was in Rome in February 1754, when Cardinal Albani mentioned him to Horace Mann2 apropos of a dispute concerning the integrity of Thomas Jenkins as a dealer in Rome at that time, see Smith 1753-4. A small portrait of La Touche dated 1781 by H.D. Hamilton indicates his presence in Rome (Christie's, 1 Mar. 1985). On 18 January 1787 'Mr and Mrs La Touche, and two daughters - Irish' were recorded in Naples.3   On 24 September 1791 David La Touche paid 40 guineas for Greek vases bought from James Clark in Naples.4 Between 1 December 1792 and 24 March 1793 Robert Parker met 'two Mr Latouch's' in Naples.5
In 1787-88 Canova received commissions for three figures of Amorini, one from John La Touche in Rome.1 La Touche was a friend of Hugh Douglas Hamilton, to whom he sat in June 1789 and in July they were together in the Villa Borghese.2 They may also have visited Sicily together; a copy by Anna Tonelli after a portrait by Hamilton of John La Touche includes the amphitheatre at Taormina with Mount Etna in the background (Christie's, 10 Jul. 1990). John was probably the La Touche who arrived in Venice on 10 August 1789,3 and he appears to have been with his father at Naples in the winter of 1792-3 (see David La Touche). Between July 1794 and April 1795 La Touche, recorded as 'Gio.la Touch d'Inghilterra', toured in northern Italy: on 10 and 11 September he was in Verona, staying at the Locanda Due Torri; he arrived in Venice on 10 January 1795, staying with Joseph Jeffry and his wife and Frederick Parr at the Locanda Petrillo.4 A 'Mr Latouche', possibly the same, was listed by Captain Cochrane in Pisa on 7 January 1795.5 In Dublin, on 14 August 1792, H.D. Hamilton visited the La Touche residence in Harcourt Street to witness the unpacking of a marble pedestal upon which Canova's Amorino (Sotheby's, 4 Jul. 1996) was to be placed.6 In September 1800 Canova complained to Hamilton that he still had not received his 'cento scudi' for this work.7
A handsome, foppish and clever man, John Law first went abroad after being condemned for the murder of Edward Wilson in London in 1694. In France he met Katherine Knollys, daughter of the titular Earl of Banbury and married to a Frenchman, Seignieur; she eloped with Law to Italy and they settled in Genoa. Law successfully speculated in foreign currency, and they later moved to Venice. In April 1703 he discussed financial schemes with the French ambassador at Turin. They were back in Scotland in the winter of 1703-4 with an infant son, John.1  They were again in Genoa in 1707, the family now including a daughter. They are said to have spent several years in Italy, and to have visited Rome, Florence and Venice, gambling in each city with spectacular success. In 1711-12 Law was proposing the creation of a state bank to the Duke of Savoy. In 1712 he moved to The Hague. When he came back to Italy ten years later Law was known throughout Europe, the intervening years having witnessed the establishment, success and collapse of his 'system' in France. He and his son had been allowed to leave France, while 'Madame Law' and their daughter were detained. Law travelled under the name of Dujardin or Gardiner and arrived in Venice on 19 January 1721, although, said Elizeus Burges, he would 'be much better pleased, if he was well settled in old-England'.2 'Il a trouvé le plus beau palais [on the Calle del Ridotto] qu'il y pu trouver et qu'il y est fort courtisé', Poerson reported.3 He left Venice on 15 March, 'to take a Trip for eight or ten daies into the Country, and to see some Places in Lombardy he has never yet been in', said Burges, who had been anxious to dissuade him from visiting Rome.4 He returned after visiting Ferrara and Bologna, and spent several more months in Venice, meeting the Pretender and hearing complaints from Rosalba Carriera that her brother-in-law, Pellegrini, had not been paid for his decoration of the bank in the Palais Mazarin.5 With his winnings from gambling Law was able to buy some paintings (several were subsequently sold in London in 1722-3). In August he was briefly joined by his sister-in-law, Mrs William Law, whose business, Burges believed, was to 'acquaint her Brother with the true state of their present condition, and see whether He can contribute any thing towards procuring her Husband's Liberty' (Law's brother had assisted him in Paris).6 On 25 August Law left for England.7  In London Law's fortunes reached their lowest ebb, until he was granted a pension in 1723 by the duc d'Orléans. In 1725 he was sent by the British government on a secret diplomatic mission to Munich. He went on to Aix-la-Chapelle and Augsburg, and in 1726 was given permission to retire to Venice. There he completed his Histoire des Finances pendant la Régence. In February 1727 he again met the Pretender, and on 29 August 1728 he met Montesquieu. In February 1729 he was taken ill and on 21 March he died.8 He was buried in S.Geminiano (pulled down in 1809). Law left a number of pictures, including his portrait by Rosalba Carriera (taken in Paris), a Jupiter and Io by Correggio and a van de Velde; they were sold at Christie's in 1782. Law's son John was with his father in Venice by May 17289 and attended him on his death bed; he subsequently returned to his mother in Paris.

Mr and Mrs Law were noticed in Rome sometime between December 1785 and April 1786,1 and a Mrs Law, possibly the same, was in Rome on 25 December 1787.2


Lawless, town major in Avignon' and brother of Sir Patrick Lawless, was in Florence on 26 April 1732, intending to go on to Rome (SP 98/33; Colman, 26 Apr. 1732).'Poor Mr Lawless' whom Mrs Piozzi had known in Naples, Venice and Milan, died at Nice early in 1787, aged 23.1 Henry Quin saw Lawless in Rome sometime during the winter of 1785-6.2
A merchant at Leghorn who supported the appointment of a British chaplain to the factory, and probably the Mr Lawrence who delivered a letter, dated Leghorn 19 September 1708, from Basil Kennett to White Kennett in London (Lansd.1041, ff.6, 29).



Lawson spent six years at the English College in Rome, leaving on 30 April 1770 (Kirk), and he was presumably the Harry Lawson mentioned by Father Thorpe on 28 April as about to take a parcel to Flanders (Thorpe letters MSS*).

He was in Padua in May 1701,1 and was probably the Lawson in Rome in August 1701 who talked 'briskly against ye morals in Rome and spoke highly of reforming them'.2
He was in Padua on 20 December 1716,1 in the second week of March 1717 he left Naples for Rome.2

An unsuccessful attorney, Layer became an active Jacobite and in 1721 set out for Rome to see the Pretender with another Jacobite agent, John Plunkett. He travelled under the name of Captain Fountaine and carried with him a list of Norfolk Tories loyal to the Pretender, with whom he had two audiences at the Palazzo Muti. He also met the Princess Clementina, with whom he discussed the sights of Rome and who agreed to be the godmother of Layer's newly-born daughter. Layer and Plunkett returned through Holland and Paris. Within a year Layer was arrested and he was executed as a traitor on 17 May 1723.1 At his trial he claimed that he had set out to visit a son of Lady Margaret Paston at Venice and had only then decided to go on to Rome; on 13 March 1723 Rawlinson heard in Rome that 'Mr Smybert and Mrs Hay were to be the two witnesses to prove Mr Layers being at Rome'.2
Sigr Nicolo Leake' was living in the Strada della Croce in Rome at Easter 1702,1 and 'Mr Leake' met the Duke of Shrewsbury on three occasions in Rome between February and July.2 He was apparently travelling with William Moncrief as his tutor and Alexander Cunningham, since they were together at Padua on 19 July.3 Cunningham had been in Rome by December 1701 when Leake and Moncrief were presumably with him.

Leary was recorded in Rome between 4 May 1702 and 20 May 1704, in the retinue of the Duke of Shrewsbury. He was with the Duke while he bought prints for Lord Godolphin, and inspected lodgings for Lord Brudenell; he arranged for the burial of an Italian footman killed by one of Shrewsbury's footmen, and he was sent to visit a Mr Trelawny in prison; in May 1704, in poor health, he wished to return to England: 'I bid him try among his priests to get a pass', wrote Shrewsbury, who exacted a promise that he would 'carry no letters nor messages prejudicial to her Majesty's Government' (Shrewsbury Jnl., 4 May, 12 Oct. 1702: 2 Jun., 1, 24 Sep. 1703: 20 May 1704).


The ward of Galfridus Mann (Horace Mann's brother), Lee was in Florence as a lieutenant in the 44th Foot when, following a fracas in the teatro del Cucumero, he went to Bologna to fight a duel with a French ensign, Leopold Laugier, on 11 March; both were injured, Lee recovering in Venice.1 In January 1753 he had helped John Vernon, an English traveller accused of rape, to escape from Naples.2
On returning from Smyrna, Edward Lee and his wife Ester Maria lost their three children in Italy within three months: a daughter was buried in Naples and two sons, Richard aged six and Edward aged five in Leghorn on 30 October and 1 November 1797 (Leghorn Inscr., 85).
Captain of the Falkland, in Leghorn in 1726 he commissioned for his brother, Lord Lichfield, a scagliola table (VAM), one of the scenes being of his own ship flying a red flag; Lee thought the table 'will be the finest of the sort in Europe'.1 The Falkland under Captain Lee was again listed at Leghorn in 1737.2


On 25 November 1752 Lee was at Capua, going to or coming from Naples, with a Mr Fitzhugh.1 He was in Rome during the winter of 1752-3, when Stephen Riou met him.2 He stayed at the Casa Guarnieri with Fitzhugh, and was described by Spence as 'ld Chief Justice Lee's son'.3 James Russel was acting as his guide in January 1753.4
He came to Florence from Rome in May 1732, a prelate recommended to the Pretender; he was the son of Lawrence Lee, a considerable merchant in Cadiz, and was then said to be returning to England.1 In 1747 'Leigh', 'a very noble Irishman born at Cadiz of a little merchant there', was appointed Maestro di Camera to Cardinal Henry Stuart,2 but was dismissed in August 1749.3 He was the subject of a caricature by P.L. Ghezzi.

He had been about eleven months in Leghorn by September 1722, when he spent much time with the Pretender who was visiting the port (SP 98/24, Harriman, 25 Sep. 1722).
The 4th Duke of Leeds, who had recently succeeded to the title at the age of eighteen, was travelling with his cousin, Robert Hay. They were in Venice in March and April 1734. By the end of March the Duke was recovering from an illness and talking 'of setting out to Rome in a few daies',1 but they eventually left with 'Monsieur Pageot' (Captain Piaget) on 30 April, proposing to return for Ascension.2 They passed through Padua on 1 May,3 and Pococke saw the Duke in Vicenza on 15 June.4 The three left Florence on 14 October for Rome,5 and Stosch reported they had left on their return journey by 18 December.6 Letters from the Duke on his grand tour are in the Welbeck MSS.7


Leeson travelled in Italy soon after succeeding to the considerable family fortunes in 1741. At Rome in 1744 he sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 87; NGI), the earliest extant Batoni portrait of a British sitter. In January 1745, after he had been in Rome a considerable time with his secretary Robert Wood (later the well-known archaeologist), he was introduced to Cardinal Albani in Rome by Horace Mann.1 On 24 October 1745 Leeson dined with Richard Phelps, John Clephane and John Bouverie in Rome.2 In 1745 Mann described the seizure by the French of a boat with '£60,000 worth of goods, and many statutes [sic], pictures, etc, of one Mr Leeson, a rich Irishman'.3 Among his commissions were a copy of Salvator Rosa's Atilius Regulus from Vernet in March 1745,4 and a pair of scagliola tables from Belloni (which took almost three years to complete).5  In 1750 'Monsiu Lisson' was living off the Piazza di Spagna in Rome with 'Monsu Arvi' (presumably his nephew Joseph Henry).6 In 1751 Edward Thomas in Rome saw 'the 2 famous Centaurs lately found in ye villa Adriana'; he was with Mr Leeson who 'offerd 2000 pounds Sterl. for them wch proposal was receiv'd with indignation'.7 Leeson appeared with his son in Reynolds's Parody of the School of Athens (NGI) painted in Rome in 1751; he gave a drawing or miniature of a lady (probably of his second wife Anne) to Batoni from which he painted a small whole length (see Clark/Bowron 87, 149), and he commissioned four oval marines from Vernet in 1751.4 The Milltown Gift to the National Gallery of Ireland made in 1902, must include many other works acquired by Joseph Leeson (such as the pastels by Rosalba Carriera, paintings by Panini and the 17th-century Florentines Dandini, Lippi, Furini and Ficherelli; copies of Guercino and Guido Reni, marbles by G.B. Piamontini and bronzes by Soldani).8
Joseph Leeson was in Rome with his father (also Joseph Leeson). In 1751 he sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron, 146; NGI) and he appeared with his father in Reynolds's Parody of the School of Athens (NGI), painted in Rome in 1751. Leeson and Joseph Henry appear together in a caricature by P.L. Ghezzi (priv. coll.) and Leeson was possibly the 'Mr Lutin' seen taking coffee with Lord Charlemont in another Ghezzi caricature (formerly A.M. Clark coll.). It was probably before his visit to Rome that Leeson attended the Turin Academy (in 1768 Kildare wrote that Madame de St Gilles in Turin thought it 'very hard [Russborough] won't send her his picture').1  As Lord Russborough he came from Turin to Genoa in March 1778,2 and he was in Florence on 8 August.3 He was once said to appear in Zoffany's Tribuna, but the identity is now doubted.4 On 3 October 1778 John Collet wrote that Russborough was in Savona, adding 'I am very glad he miss'd Genoa and Turin'.5
On 23 February 1794 at the opera in Rome, a Mr Leeson, brother to [the 2nd] Lord Milltown, and Thomas Brand (1774-1851) appeared in 'Dirty Dress' with cropped hair. Both young men vowed to socialise in Rome in such attire; they were soon informed that they would be unwelcome at any receptions hosted by either Romans or Britons, and subsequently they appeared in full dress coat, but were unable to wear a bag to their cropped hair. Sarah Bentham also met Mr Leeson in the Borghese Gardens on 16 January 1794, and again in Milan on 18 and 20 April 1794.1 It is impossible to say whether this Mr Leeson was William or Robert, the sons of the 1st Earl of Milltown by his third marriage. A 'Lieson' was reported (probably in retrospect) to have left Rome for Naples by July 1794.2
Lefroy was a successful merchant at Leghorn who made a distinguished collection of medals, pictures and antiquities (the Museo Lefroyano). He established the Casa Lefroy in 1740 to import textiles from England, and later entered into partnership with Peter Charron.1 He married Elisabeth Langlois at Leghorn on 18 February 1738 and the Danish painter Marcus Tuscher devised decorations for their wedding;2 two of their five children were buried in Leghorn in 1739 and 1748.3 Their daughter Febe (b. c.1741) is separately noticed. Thomas Hollis recommended Lefroy as a 'considerable & worthy British merchant, [who] has a noble collection of medals, & much other virtu'.4 He was advised on his collecting by Filippo Venuti, and a catalogue of Lefroy's medals was published in 1763 (Catalogus Numismaticus Musei Lefroyani Liburni) with a supplement by Gori describing two monuments in the collection, a marble tripod from Corinth and an Etruscan sarcophagus. His medals were bought soon after by Thomas Anson (who bequeathed them to Sir William Bagot). Gibbon met him in September 1764, but was unable to see the collection.5 Lefroy died in Leghorn in 1779 and was buried in the Protestant cemetery.6
Intending to become a Catholic, she left the family home in Leghorn in June 1762 dressed as a boy and went to an aunt in Florence (F. Pera, Curiosita Livornesi, [1899], 311-15).

Sir John and Lady Legard were living near Lausanne in 1791. By the spring of 1792 they were in Rome where they met the marquis d'Osmond and his family, victims of the French Revolution. Legard invited them to accompany him to Naples and back to Yorkshire and, according to the family history, after six months in Naples the party left Italy by the St Gotthard Pass.1 But Sir John and Lady Legard with Maria and Emily Grimston, the orphaned daughters of Robert Grimston (a Yorkshire neighbour and relation) were in Venice late in October 1792 on their way to Rome.2 They were all in Rome in April 1793 when Sir William Forbes met them and remarked that the Legards had been 'a good deal on the Continent', and that the Grimston girls were 'very handsome young ladies'; within a fortnight Sir John and his party had left for Naples.3 Sir John was in Switzerland in January 1794,1 but on 1 March 1794 Sarah Bentham had met one of the Miss Grimstons in Rome (describing her as niece to Mrs Harrison, see Mr and Mrs Harrison of Walworth).4 Sir John's party were returning to England in June 1794.1

Mr and Mrs Legge arrived in Naples, via Rome, in December 1790. By March 1791 they had spent some fourteen weeks in Naples, observing Sir William Hamilton's 'perfect dotage' over Emma. Mrs Legge's health had improved during their stay and Legge himself was 'at least a stone heavier'; they intended to pass six or seven weeks in Rome before going on to Florence.1 They were in Bologna in September,2 and were staying in Venice between 26 May and 2 June 1792.3




Sir Francis went to Italy following the death of his wife. On his way home he was with Dr Roger Kenyon in Venice, where he told the British resident, Alexander Cunningham, that 'when ye pretdr was at Rome, He [Leicester] went to ffrescati and flatly refused to see him' (SP 99/61, f.382, Cunningham, 30 Jul. 1717).
Sir John was travelling from Perpignan to Barcelona in 1784, and was in Nice in December that year.1 He is said to have made the grand tour in 1785 with the 5th Duke of Bedford2 and to have spent much time with Richard Colt Hoare 'sketching and visiting the chief galleries of art in France and Italy' (DNB). His admiration for the works of art he saw abroad served only to inspire him to patronise the art of his own country, but his letters from abroad treat mainly of his physical discomforts.3


Roger Leigh signed a merchants' memorial in Naples in 1757.1 Payments to the firm of Wills & Leigh are recorded in 1756 (see Haughton Wills) and the firm signed official documents in 1764, 1765 and 1767.2 'Leigh' was commissioned by Charles Townley to transport cases from Tarentum in July 1772,3 and he sent Lord Carmarthen's pictures back to England in 1773.4 In September 1778 Thomas Jones described him as keeping 'open hospitality every day of the week for his friends and countrymen'.5


On 22 March 1709 Broughton reported from Venice that 'Mr Leigh parted hence last Munday for Rome haveing had the ... pox favourably here this Carneval' (SP 99/58, f.29). The 'Cavaliere Leigh' who arrived at Venice on 18 October 1792,1 was probably the Mr Leigh seen by Robert Parker at Naples in the winter of 1792-3.2 Sir William Forbes met a Mr Leigh in Rome on 1 April 1793,3 and a 'Leghe', with a Mr Ingram ['Engrim'], arrived in Venice on 6 May 1793.4
Stationed at Minorca, Captain Leighton came to Leghorn with Colonel William Pinfold 'to make the tour of Italy' in January 1728.1 They arrived in Rome in February ('Capt Lupton') and left there to return to Minorca in April.2  In May 1734 Captain Leighton (possibly the same), who had previously spent a month in Rome, passed through Florence on his way to France, with a passport procured by the Pretender from the French ambassador.3
Leighton was in Florence on 22 July and 21 October 1769 and was presented to the Grand Duke on 29 October.2  He was probably the 'Ricardo' Leighton who had arrived in Venice on 3 May 1768,3 and the Mr Leighton whom Charles Greville introduced by letter to Madame Tschudi at Naples in October 1769.4 He may also have been the Leighton, whose 'performance and taste in music' were 'superior to those of most gentlemen', and who told Dr Burney in Rome (between 20 September and 22 November 1770) of some 'curious compositions' and introduced him to the 'conversations of several persons in Rome, eminent for their skill in the art, and learning of the science of sound; among whom were the Marchese Gabriele and Monsignor Reggio'.5
The Duke of Leinster made the grand tour between February 1737 and September 1739.1 He was listed (with two unidentified companions, 'Busoche'[?] and 'Grotthaus'[?]) in Florence in February 1769, the year after his son William had completed his grand tour (see William, Marquess of Kildare).2
A Jesuit priest, he studied at the Scots College in Rome between 1712 and 1719.1 In 1747 he was living on the Strada Felice at the same address as the painter Cosmo Alexander.2 In 1749 he was in Rome, 'in delicate health', and the Scottish Bishops suggested he might replace the Abbé Grant as the Scottish Jesuit agent in Rome.3 He died in London in 1760.
A Scotch man but not in Sacred Orders' and 'a great acquaintance to my Lord Manchester', Abbate Leith died in August 1702 in Venice (SP 99/57, f.69; Broughton, 11 Aug. 1702).


Leman was travelling with John Trevelyan, and they were about to leave Venice for Rome on 21 October 1781.1 A Mr Leman, surgeon to the Irish Regiment, had been in Naples in July that year.2
Lord George Lennox was in Italy in 1755 with his brother, the 3rd Duke of Richmond; both sat to Batoni in Rome, Lennox's portrait being at Goodwood (Clark/Bowron 187). See Charles, 3rd Duke of Richmond.  In 1769 Lord George was with his regiment in Minorca, where he was based until c.1773;1 in July 1770 he arrived at Leghorn on the Alarm and visited Florence.2

Protestant minister to the Jacobite household in Avignon, Leslie had somewhat reluctantly accompanied the Pretender to Italy in March 1717. After two months, apprehensive of the effect of the heat on his poor health, he asked to return to Paris, and besides, wrote Mar, 'I imagine his son Robin did not like the place, there being too little business stirring there for his stirring spirit.' Leslie left Italy in June and was succeeded by Barclay and Cowper. His son may possibly have been the Mr Lesley who came to Venice from Florence in March 1717 with a number of Jacobites,2 and who in August was said to be 'madder than ever' in France.3



Miledi Lisle Inglese' with two daughters was in Venice from 26 October to 1 November 1792,1 and they were in Naples sometime between December 1792 and March 1793.2 Mrs and Miss Leslie had moved to Rome by April.3 On 15 January 1794 Sarah Bentham attended a party in Rome at Mrs Leslie's, and she was again with Mrs and Miss Leslie on 6 February, who were then with a Mrs Louisa Freeman.4 On 16 June 1794 'Siga Louisa Freman' arrived in Venice with 'Mad.Laura Leslij Madre e Figlia'.5





By December 1737 Mr and Mrs Smart Lethieullier were in Rome where, at the request of Hans Sloane, Sir Thomas Dereham was attending them.1 On 27 December Smart Lethieullier wrote to Sloane describing an Aurora Borealis he had seen in Rome.2 George Sinclair met in Rome 'Madame Lethelius' on 23 December and 'Mrs Lethelier' on 17 and 18 February 1738; he also mentioned 'Fredericks Lethelier' (17 February),3 presumably Smart Lethieullier and Charles Frederick, whom he had already met in January 1738 at Dereham's in a company of antiquaries, 'Mons Galiani, Mons.Lequotti & Abbe Revillas'.4 Both Frederick and Mrs Lethieullier sat to Casali that year, her portrait dated Rome 1738 (Passmore Edwards Museum, London).  The Lethieulliers were still in Rome in August, proposing to leave in three weeks time for Florence, 'to stay there, & about Lombardy all the autumn, & pass the winter at Venice, so as to be ready next spring to return over into England'. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu described Mrs Lethieullier as giving 'comedies' in Venice, although the Lethieulliers had apparently left before Lady Mary arrived in September 1739.5


Having obtained long leave from his company in the Staffordshire Militia, Lord Granville sailed from Portsmouth attended by Frederick Saxe. At Majorca he met Lord Holland with whom he continued his journey. They arrived at Leghorn on 23 January 1794, and stayed briefly in Pisa and Florence.1 On 30 January 1794 Lord Granville refers to his having been away 'near 4 months'. In Florence he met Lady Webster, who thought him 'remarkably handsome and winning', though addicted to gambling, and in Naples he was much attracted by Lady Bessborough (to the annoyance of Charles Beauclerk who also pursued her).2 In 1800 she became the mother of his child.  Lord Granville described his routine in Naples as spending alternate days seeing the different curiosities, and the intermediate days in rising between nine and ten, staying at home until two, 'an hour and a half of which time is occupied by an Italian Master, who is a clever man, and who accompanied Boringdon and Morpeth from Rome. Then I walk or ride, dine at 5, go to the Spectacle, and then play a rubber of whist, and sup at Ld. Bessborough's, or Ld. Grandison's, Ld. Palmerston's'. Morpeth (later 6th Earl of Carlisle) and Lord Boringdon became his particular friends. From Naples on 22 February he mentioned a forwarding address as Jenkins at Rome, 'tho' if you imagine it cannot arrive before the 6th of April you had better let it meet me at Venice'. He and Boringdon had left Venice by 22 April.3 Lord Granville was back in England by May, having been strongly urged to return, as an officer in the Militia, by his father.



Lewis was in Italy with Lord Palmerston's son and heir Henry Temple, and there are five letters from him to Palmerston, written from Naples between 22 December 1732 and 13 March 1733.1 The name of Temple recurs in Lady Grisell Baillie's accounts at Naples ('for a bed at Mr Temples', November 1732; 'to Mr Temple's man', March 1733) and Florence ('for letters for Mr Temple'; April 1733).2 Spence saw a Mr Lewis in Florence sometime between August 1732 and April 1733.3

Lewis appears to have spent four years in Italy. He had been in Paris in 1775, before coming in November to Naples, where he stayed at an inn run by Mariano Fiorini, Gaspero Razionale and Giovanni di Mattei, until March 1776.1 Lewis next appears in Rome in April 1779 with a group of five British travellers: John Patteson, John Stewart of Allanbank, the architect John Soane, Rowland Burdon and Thomas Bowdler. Together they visited Sicily and Malta, sailing from Naples on 29 April and returning there early in July, see John Patteson. Lewis later employed Soane for the remodelling of Malvern Hall. An anonymous portrait of Richard Hodgetts, Lewis's butler in Italy (Sotheby's, 7 Oct. 1992) bears an inscription saying it was painted in Naples in 1779. In January 1780 a Mr Lewes, 'lately come from Rome' met Lord Herbert in Turin.2
Although Lewis kept a journal during his time in Italy, he told Joseph Farington in August 1807 that he had recently destroyed it because of his embarrassment at the quality of the Italian in which it was written; he also told Farington that he had gone to Italy in 1770 and returned to England in December 1772, and that he had known Piranesi well in Italy.1 His 'Ornaments and sketches done in the years 1771-72 at Rome and sundries collected since by J. Lewis' (YCBA) contains many drawings made at Rome (and one indicates a visit to Tivoli). Most are of antique figurative or arabesque reliefs, ancient vessels and religious accoutrements; an interest in the modern use of grotesques is evident in sketches made at Raphael's Villa Madama and the Vatican Loggie, in drawings of works by Michelangelo and Bernini, and in three of his own designs.

F. Lewis', 'William Lock' and 'J. Hampden' were in Padua on 21 November 1724.1 Lock and Lewis arrived in Rome on 23 January 1725, and left on the 26th with Hampden for Naples; they returned to Rome on 13 February.2 At Easter 1725 'Tomaso Lesuic', 'Giovanni Aspeden' and 'Roberto Loc' were staying near the Piazza di Spagna in Rome.3

Lord Lewisham visited Italy with a Mr Stevenson, who was, thought Sir William Hamilton, 'as proper a companion for a young man as any I have ever seen in that situation'.1 They were in Genoa on 24 October 1777, dining with the consul, John Collet.2 They spent a few days in Milan early in November, and on 2 December Lewisham was writing to Thomas Pelham (later 2nd Earl of Chichester) from Florence in praise of Lady Cowper ('Charming little woman! what eyes! what a Complexion!').3 They sat to Zoffany for inclusion in the Tribuna (Windsor). By 17 February 1778 they were in Naples, Hamilton describing Lewisham as faultless 'except that his outside is a little too fat'.1 They had left Naples by 24 March,4 and were in Rome in April;5 on 14 May they arrived in Venice.6 In June Lewisham was elected MP for Plymouth, presumably in his absence.


Leydel, described as 'pittore Inglese', was given permission to copy portraits in the Uffizi on 13 March 1772 (SP 105/321, f.183. Borroni 1987, 100, 104, 112, 121, 135).
Liddell had been in Paris in July 1733 and had been ill at St Jean de Maurienne in September, when he was with Shallett Turner.2 Together they arrived in Florence early in November 1733, intending to go on to Rome.1 They were to leave Venice on 1 May 1734 for Milan,3 where Liddell and Sir Hugh Smithson 'went to the French Army near Mantua', and Smithson and Liddell were in Vicenza to hear Farinelli sing on 15 June.4
In 1729 Liddell had been caught in flagrante with Lady Abergavenny, whose husband was awarded £10,000 damages. Liddell then made over his estates to his younger brother and indulged in extensive travel. 'No doubt he has a good estate', said Lord Ailesbury, 'as one may judge by appearance in going to all countries to divert himself, and as he told me Lord Abergavenny would never have a penny of his money'.1 He was in Padua on 3 June 1732.2 He was probably the 'Lyddel' seen by Spence in Rome sometime between 1 May and 30 June 1732, and the 'Liddal' in Paris in July (when 'Sr.Harry Liddal' was separately noticed).3

A lively sensible young man' of singular good looks, at seventeen Lord Lincoln had only his younger sister surviving of a family of ten. He had been adopted by his uncle the Duke of Newcastle, who was to watch over his grand tour. Lincoln set out in September 1739 with his tutor Joseph Spence to attend the Turin Academy for a year and their subsequent travels are described in their letters home.1  Turin, Lincoln told his uncle, was 'the prettiest town I ever saw'; in the Academy 'we begin riding at 8 o'clock in the morning, dance at 10, fence at 11, all dine together at half an hour after 12'; his Italian master attended him in the afternoon, and he was also being introduced to society and had hunted with the King, Charles Emmanuel III (25 Nov. 1739). The other principal scholars, Spence recorded, were a Sardinian Marquis, a Polish earl, a young nobleman from Switzerland and an Irish gentleman (24 Oct. 1739). In November Lincoln met Horace Walpole with whom he formed an intimate friendship.2 In August 1740 he sprained his leg 'jumping' at a party given by the Count Riverola, an injury which delayed their departure for Milan until 15 September; they visited the baths at Acqui en route, the waters having 'a very good effect' on Lincoln's leg (20 Sep. 1740). They were in Bologna to join the celebrations of the election of a Bolognese Pope, Benedict XIV, on 9 October, and on the 21st they arrived in Florence where they again met Horace Walpole with whom they dined 'almost every day'. Lincoln's affections were, however, equally engaged by Lady Sophia Fermor, then travelling in Italy with her sister Charlotte and her mother, Lady Pomfret. 'I love Lady Sophia more than words can express' he later told his uncle (8 Apr. 1741) and Spence was exercised in keeping abreast of Lincoln's subsequent correspondence with her. The journey to Rome was endangered by floods, the Tiber having burst its banks three miles out of Rome. They stayed near the Piazza di Spagna,3 and Lincoln met his kinswoman Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, 'as extraordinary as my imagination had fancied her'. In turn she thought him a man 'of Spirit and sense' who professed 'great abhorrence of all measures destructive of the Liberty of his Country', and she heard that he had 'taken a large house and intends to keep a table, &c.'.4 Apart from the Pomfrets, Lincoln's guests in Rome were to include Francis and Samuel Dashwood, Nathaniel Castleton, Francis Naylor and George Pitt. He frequented the opera with Spence and they had a box at the Teatro Aliberti just under the Pretender's.  In March the young painter James Russel accompanied them on a two week excursion to Naples6 and they saw Herculaneum (where serious excavations had started in 1738). Lincoln appears not to have been unduly eager to acquire works of art, but he bought 'a fine collection of prints' from Richard Dalton,5 and there is a list by Spence of expenses 'for virtu' which includes several unspecified works of art.  The Duke of Newcastle, meanwhile, was urging Lincoln to return home, as a Spanish expedition to Milan seemed imminent (with the outbreak of the War of the Austrian Suiccession), but social inducements proved more persuasive. Lady Pomfret described a concert in Rome to which Lincoln had invited her with her daughters on St George's day, 'when all the English wore red crosses; which when together made a considerable number and looked very pretty'.7 On 11 May Lincoln dined with Lady Pomfret and her daughters and the next day they all went to Frascati. Three days later Lincoln made his farewells in Rome, though he had not seen the last of the Pomfret party in Italy. Spence and Lincoln proceeded to Reggio allegedly for the opera ('four of the best voices in Italy on the stage all together', wrote Spence; 'Caristini, Salimbeni, Amorevoli, and the Tesi'). But the main purpose of their visit was apparently to see Walpole, whom they found alone and apparently unwell. Dr Cocchi was summoned from Florence, but the presence of Lord Lincoln provided the necessary cure. For the next three months he and Walpole remained together. On 27 May they reached Bologna where they met up again with the Pomfrets. There was a joint excursion 'in a party of five coaches' to the Monte de Guardia to enjoy 'the delightful prospect of the distant city'.8 They all moved on to Venice, where Lincoln maintained his attention to Lady Sophia but finally took his leave of her at Padua on 20 June. He then stayed on in Venice with Walpole. They sat to Rosalba Carriera for pendant portraits (priv. colls.)9 and witnessed the coronation of the new Doge (Pietro Grimani) on 1 July. They set out home soon after; they were in Paris on 29 August and were in England by November.
Young Lord Lincoln's propensity for dancing girls made his tour particularly expensive, despite the presence of his governor, the Rev. George Chamberlayne. He had first gone to the Academy in Turin, where he was expected in October 1769.1 A year later, in September 1770, he came to Florence,2 and by December he was in Naples.3 At Caserta in January he danced with the King in a men-only country-dance, giving his Majesty 'such a twirl in return, as both surprised and pleased [him].'4 In March he was in Rome, looking for virtù,5 and on 8 May he arrived in Venice,6 to stay in fine apartments in the Palazzo Contarini (which were taken by Mrs Anne Miller on 31 May).7  Lincoln returned to Florence where he was ensnared by a Venetian dancer, Mme Lamberti, who worked in collusion with sharpers named Zanovitch and Zen.8 By September Chamberlayne and a Mr Barrett (who was apparently travelling with them) had complained to the Abbé Grant that his Lordship was 'loosing his time with a Strumpet of the Theatre, the Gibetta'.9 Lincoln was spectacularly fleeced, to the tune of twelve thousand guineas, and although his oppressors were to be banished from Florence by the Grand Duke, it was only the intervention of the Duke of Gloucester that led to Lincoln's escape. Meanwhile Lincoln was listed in Florence on 30 November10 and he was dining with the Duke of Gloucester, Lord Cowper, Lord Cholmondeley and others on the Trident at Leghorn on 1 December.11 On 22 December Lincoln was dragged from Florence, put on board the Trident and taken to Naples.12 Soon afterwards he returned to England. He was elected to Parliament in May 1772.


In December 1775 Lindsay was in Rome, where he frequently played cards with Horatio Mann; both went on to Naples.1  In the summer of 1784 he commanded a squadron at Leghorn, where he arrived on 10 May;2 he was in Pisa on 9 June, and was sailing from Leghorn to Naples on 16 June.3



As a boy Linley went to Florence in 1768 to study the violin under Pietro Nardini 'for about three years'. In March 1770 he met, and became friendly with Mozart who was the same age.1 Dr Burney met 'the Tommasino' in Florence in September 1770, and heard him play two concertos, 'very much in the the manner of his master'.1 Linley was back in England in 1771.
On being attainted following the unsuccessful Jacobite rebellion of 1715, Linlithgow fled to the Continent to join the exiled Stuart court. In May 1717 he left Pesaro for Milan, where he was staying from May to July. 'This place seems very dull to us that have none of the language and no acquaintances', he wrote; 'our whole pensions will not pay for our lodging and eating in the month, and both are indifferent enough'.1 He was listed in Italy in December 1717,2 and arrived in Rome early in April 1718.3 He died in Rome 'of a dropsy' on 6 April 1723.4
Lord Linton was travelling with another Scottish Jacobite, Francis Panton (who had previously been in Padua on 21 January 1715).1 They had arrived in Padua on 9 February 1718,2 and they left Venice with Lord Johnston on 6 March for Rome.3 Linton went straight on to Naples, returning to Rome early in May.4 In June one of his Italian servants killed a Scottish servant of the Duke of Queensberry: 'it has made no difference between the masters', Panton reported, 'Lord Linton having shown himself as forward in pursuing the murderer as the Duke himself'.5 On the death of Mary of Modena in June, Linton put himself and his servants in deep mourning.5 He was still in Rome in August.6 He returned to London from Paris in about August 1719.
When Lipyeatt's older brother Thomas returned to England in the autumn of 1753, Lord Bruce wrote that 'A younger brother of his will be in Italy soon to accompany me in my tour through Germany'. In addition to the tours listed above, it has been suggested that Jonathan Lipyeatt sat to Patch in Florence in 1774 (Patch 1940, 32-3).

James Gibbs saw him in Rome in December 17071 and he was in Padua the following February.2

Thomas Lisle was in Padua on 27 May 1735,1 and he appears on an undated list of members of the Jacobite Lodge at Rome 1736-7.2
In December 1716 Daniel O'Brien came from Ireland to the exiled Stuart court at Saint-Germain-en-Laye and spent the rest of his life on the Continent in the Pretender's service. Most of his time was spent as a Jacobite agent in Paris, where he was resident so long that he was practically a Frenchman. His formidable wife became the mistress of the Archbishop of Cambrai.1 But in 1746, after he had been harrassed by the Young Pretender, he gladly came to Rome to be secretary to the Pretender who made him Lord Lismore, explaining to his son that 'his Title had not been decklared without he had come here to be about me in the way he is in'.2 In 1749 there was still controversy over this appointment, which was strenuously opposed by the Young Pretender, and Lismore's wife meanwhile stayed in France.3 Lismore died in Rome in 1759, when the Pretender remembered him as 'a true friend, and an old and most faithful servant'.4




Before embarking on his distinguished career in the diplomatic service, Liston had acted as tutor to the sons of Sir Gilbert Elliot, 3rd Bt., in Paris from 1753 (see Sir Gilbert Elliot, 4th Bt.), and in 1770 he accompanied Thomas Johnes of Hafod on his European tour. Liston was subsequently chargé d'affaires at Turin between Mountstuart's departure in 1782 and his own departure for Madrid on March 1783.1 He was introduced at Court on 15 September 1782.2 He was probably the 'Liston' at Venice on 1 September.3
Joseph Littledale was an English merchant in Naples who was acting as a government agent from October to December 1796.1 He was probably the Littledale who sailed from S.Fiorenzo to Leghorn with Captain William Cochrane and a Mr Baillie in March 1794.2
A Scotch gentleman named Littlejohn' had passed through Rome on his way to Naples in December 1716.1 He wrote to the Earl of Mar from Naples on 3 January 1717 that he had made 'the tour of Italy' and had spent his time 'chiefly in the virtuoso way. What collection I've made of these things you take the greatest pleasure in I could wish you were to see rather at home than abroad'.  George Berkeley heard speak of a Mr Littlejohn who had been in Naples in about 1712.3
James Byres borrowed money from Isabella Littlejohn (Signora Francesco Tribuzzi) in 1790 (Byres 1987, 134).
In Rome in 1783 he became Batoni's only American sitter (Christie's, 12 Jul. 1990; Clark/Bowron 446). He was presumably the Livingston [Livingstoun] who visited Portici from Naples on 2 May 1783 with Allan Ramsay, Lord Grandison and others; on 7 July Ramsay saw in Rome a portrait of 'Livinstoun' by [H.D.] Hamilton, 'a very like Picture'.1  A Mr Livingston with Lord Glasgow delivered a letter to John Strange in Venice on 22 September 1785 from Robert Keith in Vienna.2 Lord Glasgow and 'Lord Livingstone' were listed in Venice in November 1785.3

In the course of his remarkable life, Lloyd appears to have visited Italy twice. On his first visit (possibly c.1740) he stayed in Venice before studying at the English College in Rome. He did not take orders but returned to Venice and became secretary to the Spanish ambassador.1 After extensive service as an army officer in England, Germany and France, he returned to Italy in January 1768 as a General in the Prussian army. His movements are described in the letters of the Verri brothers, Pietro and Alessandro, who admired his energy and the breadth of his interests (which extended from the Jesuit order to the science of war). Lloyd was fighting with General Paoli in Corsica in 1768. Pietro Verri became exhausted by him: 'Quest'uomo mi mette in inquietudine', he wrote in September 1769; 'La sua vita e' un romanzo', but their relationship improved. Lloyd left Italy in February 1770 to return to London.
Dean Lloyd visited Italy at the end of his life, at the age of fifty-eight. His travels were recorded in two journals (Lloyd jnl.MSS)1 written by an unidentified companion from Norwich. Inscribed M:Derbishire and M.Derbishire BeauLieu, they are inclined to pedantry and contain frequent lists of works of art to be seen. Lloyd was also accompanied by a Miss Constance and the writer's aunt (possibly the same person). At Milan Leonardo's Last Supper was 'much damaged & requires a learned eye to find out all its beauties'. After the Correggios had been inspected at Parma they left 'without any regret, being much disappointed, in the place, wch: look'd desolate & forlorn'. The Grand Duke's Palace at Modena was admired. Raphael's St Cecilia in Bologna was 'dull & dark & I think a very unpleasant picture', but the writer enjoyed a performance of Cimarosa's Alessandro nell'Indie. He was however pleased to leave Bologna: 'the whole City is nasty; the inhabitants dirty & very ill looking'. In Florence he listed works of art. As the party travelled on south he reflected that 'the immense plain before you come to Rome put me greatly in mind of Norfolk'. In the Vatican he was initially disappointed with Raphael, but he was advised that they 'require study'. Thomas Jenkins was frequently with them in Rome and on 11 December they saw his collection which included a statue of Paris, a fine bust of Trajan, two large sitting figures of Menander and 'Possidippus' and two paintings by Gerard de la Notte ('finely painted but with the fault his paintings always have of great vulgarity'). They glimpsed the Young Pretender and the Duchess of Albany at the Opera on 15 November, and attended conversazioni held by the Princess Santa Croce and by Cardinal de Bernis, where the writer noted that the ladies 'were magnificently dress'd wth. large hoops &c much in the Stile of Ladies in England 4 or 5 years back'. They were frequently in the company of Lord and Lady Camelford and their daughter, Ann Pitt, from 3 December onwards. On 21 December the writer visited Angelica Kauffman 'who recd: me very politely & spoke English very well'. On 24 December they heard the music of the Vigil in S.Apollinaria and on Christmas Day were in St Peter's, but the ceremonies were dismissed as 'a thousand fooleries'. The first volume of the diary ends on 31 December as Dr Lloyd was taking a quarter of a box at the Teatro Aliberti for the season.





He had left Rome in mid-December 1755 for Turin, travelling with a Mr Freeman.1 He was conceivably the 'Loid, Carlo' who, with two Italian servants, left Venice on 26 November 1756.2
Of a gentle nature - much given to Art and generally accomplished', Loch went abroad 'both for the sake of his health and also in order to reduce the burden of debt which had been imposed on the state'-partly through donations to the Stuart cause.1 He spent 'some years' in Rome where he collected coins, books and engravings, and sat for a marble bust 'by an Italian artist'. In 1777 he was sharing lodgings in Rome with Jacob More.2 He returned to Scotland by June 1779 when he married at North Merchiston.
The Mr Lock who arrived in Rome with Ingleby, Matthew Wise and John, Lord Hervey, in December 1728,1 was probably also the Charles Lock at Padua on 4 March 1730.2
A warm-hearted but impulsive man, Charles Lock was appointed consul general at Naples in 1799. Lady Elizabeth Foster innocently recommended him and his wife to Emma Hamilton as 'uncommonly amiable and pleasing',1 but Emma was to prove the bane of their diplomatic lives. On 29 January 1799 they arrived with their two small children at Palermo whither the Neapolitan court had fled from Naples. In the spring Lock toured Sicily with Guy Head and Cecilia bore their third child, but they were unsettled by their growing suspicions concerning Emma, Nelson and the Queen of Naples, Maria Carolina.  It began when Lock was not informed that the Hamiltons, Nelson and the King and Queen had returned to Naples on 23 June to exact revenge on the Jacobin element of the city, and on 30 June Lock wrote angrily of 'that superficial, grasping and vulgar minded woman' Emma Hamilton, and of Nelson's extravagant love for her which 'has made him the laughing stock of the whole fleet'. Lock sailed for Naples on 30 June (and by 13 July he had seen Pompeii). On 27 July he had a serious difference with Nelson concerning the victualling of the fleet, a contract worth some £4000 which Lock was anxious to administer himself. On 30 July Lock had decided that Emma was 'at the bottom of all the mischief. I can paint nothing so black and detestable as that woman'. On 7 August he returned to his family in Palermo, and on the 9th he reiterated that Emma Hamilton was 'the bitterest enemy you can imagine. Her wish to engross the conduct of affairs entirely ... prompted her to poison Sir William's mind against me; to this was added that she could not bear that any English woman should be admired by her countrymen except herself ... she has taken occasion to insinuate that my wife's principles are republican'. Lock visited Malta in August, but his differences with Nelson persisted, with increasing rancour on both sides. Cecilia meanwhile was hating the place and the climate. In February 1800 Lock managed to offend the King of Naples by attending a masquerade dressed (it was thought) as a sans-culotte and he was turned out.  After the departure of the Hamiltons and Nelson, the Locks came to Naples from Palermo in June 1800. They were to leave Naples on 19 March 1801, after an expensive and unhappy diplomatic tour. They returned to Naples in June 1801, but Lock, never a popular figure, resigned his post in August that year. His last visit to Italy was in April-June 1804 en route for Constantinople. He died that September in Malta of a fever.2
Daniel Lock travelled to Italy with John Talman and William Kent. They spent five months in Florence before moving to Rome in April 1710. Talman wrote on 9 May 1710 that the three would meet in Rome every Thursday 'to see fine Palaces'.1 In 1711 Lock was sharing lodgings with Kent on the Strada Paolina in the house of the painter Thomas Edwards.2 Humphrey Chetham mentioned him in Rome on 30 March and 4 April 1712, when with William Kent they visited the Villa Aldobrandini.3 Kent mentioned him in Rome in letters to Burrell Massingberd of 25 June and 17 August 1712; on 5 November 1712 Lock had gone from Rome with Talman.4 Lock was back in London by March 1714, when Henry Newton reported he had brought back a letter from Florence.5
He was presumably the Mr Lock in Venice in August 1715, described as 'One Mr Lock who hath resided some years in Persia ... arrived here in his way home with other Merchants from Aleppo (SP 99/61, f.49; Broughton, 23 Aug. 1715).

The documentation of Lock's visits to Italy is sparse. Late in 1751 he travelled from Venice to Rome with Thomas Jenkins and Richard Wilson. Lock, who was said to have encouraged Wilson to take up landscape painting, came to own many of the drawings Wilson made on their journey (but his portrait by Wilson remains untraced).1 In Rome Lock met Joseph Wilton, with whom he travelled further in Italy.2  Lock was probably in Italy in 1767,3 the year he was married; he and his wife were said to have stayed abroad a good deal during the early years of their marriage.4 In May 1773 (with John Moore, 1729-1802) he had visited Voltaire at Ferney5 and he was certainly in Rome in 1774.4  In 1787 Lock was named by Sir William Hamilton as one of the three 'true Connoisseurs of the arts in England' (the others being Charles Townley and Charles Greville),6 but it remains unclear how much of Lock's outstanding collection of old master paintings, sculpture and antiquities was acquired while he was in Italy. By 1772 it included 'among a goodly number of original models by several notable old masters, ... many in wax and terracotta by Giambologna, most of which come from the celebrated collection of Bernardo Vecchietti',7 and Father Thorpe, writing in 1774, referred to Lock having 'two of the most beautiful & largest Claudes'.8 He had bought the St Ursula by Claude (NG) from the Barberini Palace, then considered 'a most important acquisition to the stock of fine pictures in England'.9 One of Jenkins's earliest successes as a dealer was the purchase (probably in 1762) for Lock of the Pietro Santo Bartoli drawings made for Cardinal Massimi.10 Much of Lock's collection, including 'twenty-two wax models by Giov. da Bologna', was dispersed in 1785 (Christie's, 16 Apr.).
William Lock went abroad in the autumn of 1789, and was with Lord Bruce in Languedoc in the autumn of 1790. He spent time in Rome, as a result of which he renounced the idea of becoming a painter.1 He was conceivably the Mr Lock in Rome in 1791, who was disapproved of by British artists there for 'presuming to draw remarkably well, for giving his opinions and for not employing anybody at all'.2




George Lockhart visited the Stuart court in Rome in February 1720 with Captain Simon Frazer, a Scottish Jacobite, who had joined him in Calais as his tutor.1 He was presumably the Lockhart who had passed through Venice early in December 1719 with his Scottish governor and Lord Craven, Edward Holdsworth, a Mr Campion and a Mr Dawkins;2 they were all in Padua on 20 December 1719 (with a 'Mr Traper', presumably a misreading of Frazer).3
Lockhart was sent to Rome by the Young Pretender early in 1749 to solicit money from the Pope. He was in Florence in July 'recommended by Cardinal Corsini to his relations'. Horace Mann described him as 'a young man, in appearance about twenty-four years old, and I am told is the same that was an officer in his Majesty's troops, when he deserted to the rebels'.1 In December he was in Rome intending soon to return to Paris.2
James Lockhart was first in Italy in 1768, when he came to Venice with his young wife in December.1 They were in Florence in April,2 but his wife, 'poor Madie Lockhart', died there on 23 August.3 'Capt. Lockhart' arrived in Rome in December 1769,4 and 'Mr & Mrs [Miss?] Lockhart of Carnwath' were in Naples in January 1770, described as having come from Pisa, Lockhart 'now a General, a very frank goodlike sort of man'.5 General Lockhart was again in Italy from 1785. In February 1785 he was staying in Pisa with his daughter Marianna (who m. Anthony Aufrere in Pisa in 1791), part of a sober company with the Minnifies and Mallocks who 'never Play and give coffee and ice'.6 By December Lockhart had married (for the third time) in Pisa Annabella Crawford; by March 1786 he had departed for Sardinia and his wife and daughter had gone to Rome,7 but he returned to Pisa where he died in 1790. James Lockhart, the youngest son of this third marriage, was buried in Leghorn.8


Daniel Lombard' was in Padua on 4 January 1714,1 and 'one Mr Lombard, who was chaplain to Mr [John] Chetwynd at Genova', was reading prayers and preaching each Sunday in the British consul's house in Venice later that month.2

The Long brothers, Charles and James, went several times to Italy to visit their uncle, the 2nd Earl Tylney, whose considerable wealth was eventually inherited by James in 1784. They were visiting him in Florence in June 1769.1 Charles was again in Italy in 1776, when his infant daughter was buried in Leghorn in July (Harriet Etruria Long, dau. of Charles and Hannah Long of Grittleton, Wilts.).2 They were probably therefore the Mr and Mrs Long, 'nephew of Lord Tylney's' whom Patrick Home was expecting in Florence in September 1775.3  Charles again visited his uncle, with his wife, in 1782-3. He was possibly the 'Milord Lon' whose arrival was noted at Rome on 28 December 1782.4 'Mr Long' was in Naples in April 1783,5 and with Lord Tylney he showed 'civilities' to William Davenport Bromley which were not returned.6 Mr and Mrs Long set out from Naples in May 1783 to make 'a little tour to Rome', intending to return to pass the summer with Lord Tylney.7 They were seen in Rome in June,8 but Long died on 6 August, within three days of contracting malaria.9 Mrs Long is next recorded in Florence in March 1784, being closely attended by a Mr Hammond and James Dawkins of Standlynch, see Dawkins.
In August 1786 Charles Long was in Switzerland with George Cumberland, to whom he subsequently wrote a number of letters from Italy.1 By December he had been to Florence, where he had met the painter Henry Tresham, and had reached Rome. He was following a course of antiquities-'4 or 5 hours' every morning-given by James Byres, 'a man of real feeling'; he had been invited to many parties by the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester and had met the artists Grignion and Durno and had seen Tresham again (23 Dec.). He had also attended the funeral of James Six.2 Long then interrupted his course with Byres to attend the Carnival in Naples, where he had arrived by 18 January 1787.3  He was back in Rome early in February, and by the end of his antiquarian course he was describing Byres as one of the most irritable [men] I ever met with' (18 Mar.). Long bought three pictures (unspecified) in Rome (18 Mar.) and he continued to mix freely with British artists (adding Marchant and Deare to his acquaintance); he was perceptive of their work, being himself an amateur artist (5 Apr.). In March he had gone off to draw 'like a madman' in Tivoli-'the fit is just now come on' (18 Mar.). On 22 April he wrote that he intended to spend the summer in Switzerland. He next wrote from Turin on 4 November (Cumberland being then in Rome) asking about some commissions he had left with Marchant, 'a head' and some 'castes of the best heads'.4 On 20 November he was in Florence and on 2 February 1788 in Venice, admiring an exhibition of sculpture and antiquities belonging to Count Fries, in which 'Canova's Theseus [now VAM] I take to be the best thing he has bought'. This was the last of his letters; Long was elected to Parliament on 13 January 1789.
Dudley Long and Adamson were in Naples by 21 February 1775,1 and 'Andrea Adamson, Roberto Long' and 'Andrea Tompson' arrived in Venice on 22 May.2 'Andrea Adamson' was in Florence with 'Genson'[?] in April 1775.3
At Milan in May 1764 Edward Gibbon met Mr Long, whom he had already known in the Militia, the 'son of Sr Robert Long', who was en route for Venice with Lord Tylney.1 This was probably James, rather than Charles Long. The brothers were in Florence in June 1769, visiting their uncle, Lord Tylney, see Charles Long. Sir James Long was in Naples with his wife and Lord Tylney in May 1777 and Lady Long was introduced to the Queen of Naples on the 13th.2 Sir James made an expedition to Paestum with Thomas Pelham (later 2nd Earl of Chichester) and visited Capri, and with Lord Tylney they intended going to Florence by the beginning of July.3 Horace Mann was also expecting them in Florence at the end of June.4

Sir Robert was in Padua on 14 December 1731,1 and Spence saw him before March 1732 in Venice,2 where his portrait (now at Melbury) was drawn by Rosalba Carriera.3 In May 1733 he was again in Venice with Mrs Strangways-Horner and her daughter, going to Spa.4

Lord Longford travelled with a tutor, G.F. Nott, and their tour and itinerary are described in his letters home.1 Both were young men, and they were often taken for brothers (5 Aug. 1794). They were in Brussels on 2 December 1793 and travelled through Germany, Austria and Switzerland before coming to Milan on 10 September 1794. Later that month they met Lord Carmarthen (later 6th Duke of Leeds) in Turin and decided to travel south with him. In Pisa they gave a ball which included a supper; as it was not the custom to provide food at such a function 'all balls are left deserted when people get hungry' (19 Nov.). Longford was engagingly frank concerning the sculpture in Florence which, he said, did not produce on him the effect which a middling picture does (19 Nov.). Nott, by contrast, was 'almost mad', stopping at every stone wall to seek 'any pretensions to antiquity', yet, wrote Longford, they were 'great together' (6 Dec.).  They spent only two days in Rome, passing straight on to Naples, where they found the singer Elizabeth Billington 'in great glory' (21 Dec.) and enjoyed themselves during the Carnival, giving a public ball. Longford subsequently reflected how the gaiety of Naples contrasted with life in Rome, where he was obliged to search after antiquities, 'to stand an hour hungry & cold under an ugly old pillar of marble while a prosing antiquarian harangues on the merits thereof - all this because 'it is the custom''; he had had a surfeit of works of art and decided that Rome 'was not the place for me' (7 Apr.). It was Nott's turn to enjoy himself: he 'finds as much pleasure in holding forth on an antique fragment or puzzling to make out a half effaced inscription as a London Alderman in sitting down to a haunch of venison' ((7 Apr.). They stayed two weeks in Venice,2 and by 20 June they were in Vienna on their way home.
Lord de Longueville was in Padua on 2 October 1709,1 and in Venice by 20 December.2 He was next seen in Rome in March 1711;3 he left on 4 August, according to Alexander Cunningham 'with a wounded heart, as you know all young men do that have been here a long time'.4 On 3 October he arrived in Genoa where he intended to await the arrival of the King of Spain before proceding home.5 Baldwyn saw him there in November 1711.6



Lord Lorne was in Rome in December 1788,1 and in January 1789 he was in Naples with a M. de Sanpeure, dining on successive days with T.C. Porter and Sir William Hamilton.2


Lovelace began his grand tour with his tutor Debeyenne. In the summer of 1726 they were at Lunéville, where Willem Bentinck remarked how Lovelace was kept low in funds by his friends in England.1 Lovelace was in Padua on 17 May 1727 with Lord Cranstoun,2 and was expected in Rome, but Debeyenne had already left him, 'upon acount of my Ld's not having wherewithal to maintain him.'3 But by the beginning of July Cranstoun had left Lovelace lying ill in Bologna and as Bentinck's tutor, Bernege, then wrote: 'Mon'r Debeynne lui auroit été fort nécessaire et fort utile dans une cunjoncture pareille'.4 Later that month Lovelace was able to write to Bentinck from Bologna to say he had left for 'la réserve de Monsr.Murray'5 (meaning, presumably, James Murray at Rome).  In September Lovelace was penniless in Leghorn, but on the 13th Bentinck, who thought him 'as worthy a young man as ever I met with', sent him £50.6 Lovelace stayed in Leghorn for the celebrations of George II's coronation in October7 and Bentinck joined him there that same month. They decided to go to Florence together, after which Lovelace would go on to Rome while Bentinck went to Bologna.8 They left Leghorn on 30 October, and were presented to the Grand Duke in Florence on 9 November.9 Bentinck left Florence in December, and Lovelace is next heard of leaving Naples in March 1728 to visit Sicily and Malta with John King and Hugh Barlow. On 10 April they were in Messina,10 and they had returned by July (see Hugh Barlow). In October Lovelace was one of very few Englishmen in Rome,11 and in April 1729 he was about to leave for Leghorn, intending to travel home by sea via Minorca and Gibraltar.12
Lovell accompanied the 4th Earl of Bristol during the first years of his last tour of Italy. He was sent back to Suffolk in 1796 but rejoined Lord Bristol in Germany the same year. He did not greatly enjoy his travels, and wrote to the Countess of Lichtenau in January 1797 that 'le voyage d'Italie fini, je briserai les chaînes que j'ai portées cinq années pour satisfaire à mes devoirs, mais qui sont devenues insupportables par les meprises et insolences de celui à qui je voudrais plaire'. In the summer of 1797 he duly left Lord Bristol who wrote that 'Mr Lovell [was] near seven years with me without a single altercation, suspicion or jealousy; yet he had weak spirits & a dejected mind' (Childe-Pemberton, 2:505, 538, 550).


Having gained the first gold medal awarded by the RA for history painting, he was awarded the first RA Travelling Scholarship in 1771. He went to Rome, 'but was indolent and spent his time in dissipation' and his scholarship was withdrawn in 1772 (Redgrave).


Lowther appears in Pignatta's painting, dated 1715, of Sir Andrew Fountaine and his friends in the Tribuna in Florence (Narford). Lowther was in Rome in January 1716 with Richard Arundell and Fountaine,1 and in Padua in May 1716.2 In September he was about to leave Venice with them, having recovered from a fever; see Fountaine.
Lowther's six-month tour began in August 1784, and he sailed to Naples from Marseilles. His account survives (Lowther MSS, Clywd RO, Ruthin, DD/L/76; see H. Owen, Lowther Family, 365, 443).
Lowther wrote from Geneva in 1759, proposing to move to Holland for study, but he was in Naples in December 1760.1 The following February he was in Rome with a Mr Watson, and they were travelling in Tuscany in May.2 Later that year Lowther was seen in Venice.3
Sir William Lowther was in Italy at the same time as his Yorkshire neighbour, Charles Turner of Kirkleatham.1 In July 1751 Lowther was in Venice.2 Later that year in Rome, Reynolds included him in the Parody of the School of Athens (NGI), standing by Joseph Leeson (later 1st Earl of Milltown).3 Lowther also appeared with Joseph Leeson in separate caricatures by Reynolds of 1751 (NGI and priv. coll.), and he commissioned four landscapes from Joseph Vernet in 1751-2.4


As Sir Charles Bingham he was in Rome in the winter of 1755, when he was said to have witnessed the death of Madame Gabrielli at Frascati.1 He probably also met Horace Mann who in 1778 was to refer to him as 'an old acquaintance'.2 In 1776 Lord and Lady Lucan set out for the Continent with their two older daughters, Lavinia (1762-1831, later Countess Spencer) and Margaret (1767-1839, later Mrs Thomas Lindsay), their son Richard (1764-1839), and a niece, Frances Molesworth. They left Paris in November 1776, intending to return in eighteen months time having visited Italy.3  Henry Swinburne saw the Lucans and two accomplished daughters in Rome in July 1778,4 and they were in Florence in October. They were, wrote Mann, 'a most amiable family': Lady Lucan 'is very clever and has many accomplishments, and is teaching them to her daughters, who by their judgment of the picture and all the collection in the Gallery are looked upon as prodigies at their age here. I wish they were as handsome as their cousin, Miss Molesworth, who is with them.'2 By 11 November they were back in Rome, attracting the attention of the Bishop of Derry who invited the six to dinner: 'it will be a family dinner', he wrote, 'and probably a cheerful one'.5 The Lucans spent five months in Rome6 during which Lady Lucan devoted herself to painting and in April 1779 she was made an honorary member of the Accademia di S.Luca.7 That same month they returned to Florence, Mann reporting that Lady Lucan had given him one of her paintings and Miss Molesworth had given him 'two very pretty drawings of her own drawing. The two Miss Binghams are improved in music and their brother is a fine lad in all the rusticity of a schoolboy. Him my Lord intends to leave at Neufchatel'; he mentioned that they had acquired 'a pretty little sarcophagus in Rome' for Horace Walpole-who received the news somewhat coolly.8 The Lucans were back in England by September.

Charles Lucy, a portrait painter, born in London in 1692, went in 1705 to Florence where he studied under Dandini; he then studied under Cignani in Forli, before settling at Bologna to practise as a portrait painter.1  This was presumably also the Charles Lucy in Bologna who wrote to his (alleged) kinsman George Lucy in Rome, where they met in March/April 1758.2 George Lucy made him a yearly allowance and commissioned work from him. A Madonna was finished by 2 June 1758, presumably the copy of a Virgin and Cupid [sic] which Charles Lucy mentioned to George in a letter from Rome of 1 July 1758, together with copies of a Satyr with Cupid and The Gamesters. A later letter, dated simply '26 July' offered a Tobit which, with a Herodias (and the previously mentioned copies) was received at Charlecote.3
His health being impaired after a somewhat dissipated youth, George Lucy travelled abroad to recuperate, first to Portugal in 1755- 6 and then to Italy in 1756-8. He was accompanied on both voyages by the Rev. John Dobson, 'a young clergyman', an English servant Richard Clare and a Swiss courier, Daniel Graff.1 They set out in the autumn of 1756 and were in Ostend on 5 October, Venice from 10 to 12 November,2 and they reached Rome on the 22nd.  On their arrival the other English (some thirteen or fourteen) came to pay their compliments, 'none of whom I was so happy as to know', wrote Lucy, 'but it seems the custom is, that when any English arrive, those in Rome immediately pay them that respect.' (24 Nov.). They went on to Naples, their 'winter quarters', whence Dobson wrote to his friend the Rev. John Hammond on 20 December describing the Pantheon of Agrippa and St Peter's in Rome. Lucy wrote a week later to Mrs Hayes briefly describing Rome and Herculaneum and asking for some fine clothes to be sent out. On 7 February Dobson again wrote to his friend describing Herculaneum and the museum in the Palace of Portici ('without dispute the noblest treasure of antiquity in the universe'). On 22 March Lucy wrote that Naples was disagreeable; the weather had been bad and the Neapolitans were unsociable; only the marquesa di Casa Nuove, married to an Englishman, seemed to have pleased him. In June they moved to Gruno, a little town near Naples, and there Lucy learned that the box with his fine clothes had been captured by Moors. In November they moved back to Naples. Lucy climbed Vesuvius the following spring and Dobson noted that the face of the mountain had much altered since the previous year (1 Mar. 1758). They were intending to go to Rome at the end of March for three or four weeks and then travel on to Holland, via Florence, Turin and down the Rhine.  They reached Rome on 2 April and began to study virtu for at least four hours every morning except Sunday; Lucy sat to Batoni who indicated the portrait would take a month or five weeks (Charlecote; Clark/Bowron 212); he met Charles Lucy 'the painter', an event which he correctly supposed 'must end in my making him some present' (12 Apr.). On 5 May they reached Florence, after an unpleasant journey in which the carriage got stuck on a hill and they 'were obliged to take up our quarters in a most filthy place, where we became a prey to thousands of fleas'; but the Grand Duke's galleries impressed Lucy deeply: 'in my opinion, my estates, if sold, would not purchase one of the cabinets with its contents'(6 May). They were in Augsburg by 21 May, having travelled via Bologna and Verona (21 May). They finally landed at Harwich on 24 June. After their return James Russel wrote from Rome on 2 June 1758 announcing that the marble tables were ready, the Batoni portrait had been delivered, Charles Lucy had finished his picture of the Madonna, and 'Mr Mylone' [probably Robert Mylne, whom Lucy had met in Rome3] had obtained Piranesi's prints with Raphael's heads. And on 1 July 1758 the painter Charles Lucy wrote from Rome to say he had ordered ten more vistas of remarkable ancient buildings (which would 'make twenty' in all).


Having left the army for health reasons, Luders was in Florence in November 17831 and in Rome the following winter, accompanied by a Captain Taylor.2 He later joined Thomas Whalley and his wife Elizabeth in the south of France; in September 1785 he went to Leghorn, where he died on the 30th soon after his arrival,3 and where he was buried.4

Following his escape abroad after the 1745 rebellion, Lumisden lived precariously in Rouen. In the summer of 1749 he received, as a Jacobite exile, a modest (and irregular) French pension and then in August John Daniel took him to Rome, where they had arrived by the end of the year.1 By 1751 he had become assistant to James Edgar, the Pretender's secretary. His letter books (Lumisden letters MSS), written in 'a precise style and beautiful penmanship', deal principally with the grievances of impoverished Jacobites. He had much time for other things and turned to the study of antiquity. In 1750 he visited Herculaneum, and in 1752 he was reading Rymer's Foedera: 'I now converse more with the illustrious dead than with the trifling living', he wrote in 1753 (1:155).  He described 'the disagreeable, uncertain way in which things are here' (9 Sep. 1755; 1:163) and the gradual recession of Jacobite hopes did nothing to improve his morale. In 1758 he was sent to Paris on a secret mission, leaving Rome on 8 October and returning the following May. Edgar died early in 1764 and Lumisden was promoted in his place and given his apartment. After the death of the Pretender in January 1766, Lumisden was kept fully occupied by his son. 'Almost from break of day to midnight, I am employed about the King. Besides serving him as his secretary, I am obliged to attend him as a gentleman of the bed-chamber when he goes abroad, both morning and evening; and after dinner and supper I retire with him into his closet ... I have lived for many years in a sort of bondage; but I may name these past months a mere slavery' (2:107). There was little money, the life was aimless and the Pope refused to recognise the Young Pretender's titles. On 14 December 1768 Lumisden was dismissed, along with John Hay of Restalrig and Captain Adam Urquhart, apparently as the consequence of the Young Pretender's intemperance. He left Rome with Urquhart on 10 April 1769. Throughout his time in Rome Lumisden had been helpful to visitors. Although some travellers were wary of him as a Jacobite (as Allan Ramsay in 1755), Jonathan Skelton found him 'Universally learned, extremely communicative, possessed with a vast good Nature and good Sense', and Boswell, consulting him over the choice of an historical subject for a painting, thought him 'genteel' and the soul of tact.2 Many young Scottish artists found an introduction to Lumisden of the greatest service (Chalmers, Cosmo Alexander, Katherine Read and Anne Forbes, for example). Chalmers left an unfinished portrait of him and Gavin Hamilton once invited him to his studio especially to see his Lucretia, which Lumisden thought the best picture he had painted.3 Lumisden knew Piranesi (and tried to establish a relationship between him and his brother-in-law Robert Strange) and he had known Mengs well from the time the painter arrived in Rome in 1752; between 1752 and 1761 he recommended six Scottish pupils to him (James Byres, Edward Cunningham, Colin Morison, James Nevay, George Willison and Campbell).4 Lumisden's considerable knowledge of Rome was eventually published in 1797 as Remarks on the Antiquities of Rome and its Environs. By that time Lumisden had been able to return to Scotland, 'a lively, laughing old gentleman, with polish'd manners and stiff curls'.5

A 'son of Lord Scarbrough' arrived in Venice in October 1706 with the 7th Earl of Dorset.1 They were still there the following March, 'des gens à fracas à Bals et à festins'.2 On 7 March Richard Lumley was in Padua.3



Mr Lutterell' and his governor Captain Maule were in Florence in June 1733, and Lutterell had gone to Siena by September.1 In November 'Captn Mawl' visited Martin Folkes in Rome.2 A Lutterel, 'an Etonian come from Naples', was in Rome in March 1734.3

Lord Lymington was reported to be in Rome with a Mr Dougall on 12 December 1791.1 'Milord Leymington' and 'Milor Dugal' arrived in Venice on 20 October 1792.2

Lynch had already made the grand tour as a young man before he became British envoy to Sardinia in 1768.1 He arrived in Turin on 20 March 1769 and finally left to go on leave on 2 October 1776.2 In between he had returned to England in 1772-4, when he was noted at Westminster.1 Lynch was not highly thought of at Turin; he had 'a very light character', wrote the Countess of Pembroke, and was 'very improper to guide young men, & in that small place is their constant companion'.3 He may have been the 'Milord Lince e moglie' arrived in Venice on 12 May 1776, and/or the 'Mons.Lince' who came to Venice on 10 May 1777.5




Lyte's letters from Italy addressed to Lord Cardigan (Lyte letters MSS) are quoted under John, Lord Brudenell. Lyte sat to Mengs in Rome in 1758 (Brinsley Ford coll.) and he appears with Fitzherbert and the Duke of Devonshire in the Music Lesson (priv. coll.) by Patch, who also made a caricature etching of him (Mr Light) dated 1770. Lyte exported works of art (marbles, bronzes, small tables) on three occasions from Rome: on 22 May and 20 June 1758 and 12 January 1759 (ASR ABA 11, ff. 280-1).
George Lyttelton left England in the spring of 1728 and travelled leisurely through France before reaching Turin at the beginning of November 1729.1 At Lyons in October he met Charles Wyndham who became his companion. He wrote in French to his father from Turin on 16 November saying he had been there ten or twelve days; the Spanish Ambassador, 'le marquis de Santacru', had been particularly kind to them, and they had been received by the King [of Sardinia] in his country house; they were going on to Milan and Genoa. On 20 December they were in Padua,2 prior to spending nearly two months in Venice. Lyttelton stayed there an extra two weeks 'in hopes of going to Rome with Mr W[yndham]; but an unforeseen accident having fixed him here,' he wrote on 11 February, 'I shall set out tomorrow quite alone, which will be very melancholy.' By 16 March he was in Rome,3 where he was reunited with Wyndham. Lyttelton was in Naples sometime in April, as he mentioned in a letter from Rome of 7 May. Stosch reported he was to leave Rome for England on 5 May, the day after Wyndham, and described him as 'esteemed here for his merit and talents, and hated by the Pretender and his adherents'.4 On 19 May Lyttelton and Wyndham had left Florence together, bound for Paris.5 See Charles Wyndham.
Lyttelton met Richard Colt Hoare (his sister's widower) in Florence in October 1785; they met again in Lyons in the autumn of 1786 and went on together to visit Barcelona.1 Lyttelton sat to H.D. Hamilton in 1786 (Hagley), presumably in Rome, where he was noticed during the winter of 1785-6.2
Crippled with gout which had effectively ended his military and parliamentary careers, Lyttelton went abroad for his health with his wife, the Duchess of Bridgewater. Their marriage, fifteen years before, had attracted comment: 'she, forty, plain, very rich, and with five children; he, six and twenty, handsome, poor, and proper to get her five more.'1 From 1760 to 1762 they were in Italy, where Sir Richard's nephew, Thomas Pitt (later Lord Camelford), joined them. Sir Richard and his Duchess were in Genoa in the autumn of 1760,2 and they may have stayed there until the following spring.3 In the following April Pitt left them in Leghorn where Sir Richard was confined with gout,4 and he was still there in June.5 In August the three were at the baths of S.Casciano,6 and on 7 October George Dance was introduced to them in Rome by James Russel.7 Sir Richard bought some pictures from Thomas Jenkins, 'for no large sums',8 but by the 27 October they had moved on to Naples,9 where Pitt had to leave them early in November following his father's death.10 In Naples James Adam considered Sir Richard to be 'a good sensible chatty man' and the Duchess 'very silent and very civil'.11 By March 1762 they were back in Rome, Sir Richard displaying 'every recommendation of a chearful generous humane heart'.12 In Rome Sir Richard sat to Batoni for his portrait dated 1762 (Hagley; Clark/Bowron 244) and he acquired many other paintings. He described to Thomas Pitt (who was then supervising alterations to Sir Richard's house in Richmond) pictures by Giordano (Enlevement of Amphitrite and Hercules and Omphale, both very large), Claude, Barrocci, Guido Reni, Salvator Rosa and Gaspard Dughet. 'What a figure will my fine room cut, when it is adorned with all the fine pictures I am collecting - which God send me safe and well from this wicked place of Gaming and Extravagance, for I shall certainly be undone else one way or another'.13 On 20 March he told Pitt that he intended to stay in Rome seven or eight weeks longer,13 and on 16 May he was given licence to export 26 paintings, three by living artists.14 The Lytteltons were probably back in England in August 1762 when Robert Strange wrote to Sir Richard asking him 'to justify my conduct to the gentlemen who were at Rome last winter', in the business of Jenkins selling pictures at inflated prices to Lord Fordwich (later 3rd Earl Cowper).15
Despite carrying a lock of his fiancée's hair as a talisman and having his travel expenses covered by his uncle (Sir Richard Lyttelton), Thomas Lyttelton's grand tour was unruly and expensive.1 He incurred huge gambling debts in Venice (which his uncle eventually settled), and fought two duels in Bologna, one with an Englishman. On 3 April 1764 'Tomaso Lyttelton' was in Capua on his way to Naples and he passed through Capua on his return on 16 May.2 His reputation had preceded him to Florence, where Gibbon heard that it would be surprising were he to behave like other people. On 25 June he met him at dinner with Horace Mann: 'Littleton s'est emparè de la conversation pour parler Poesie, politique et chymie avec une volubilitè etonnante. ... sa suffisance, son affectation, et une extravagance dans l'esprit qui tient de la folie, le rendent fort deplaisant.'3 Horace Mann was equally put out, saying that Lyttelton's 'contradictory temper makes it impossible for him to agree with anybody'.4 Between 10 and 26 August Lyttelton made visits to Pisa and Lucca, where he further distinguished himself with his arrogant behaviour, so that he was asked to leave.5 The brothers George and John Damer are said to have accompanied him on his tour, see John Damer.Lyttelton paid a second visit to Italy in 1769-71, in the course of which he incurred a complete rupture with his family (DNB). On 2 December 1769 'mylaedy Letailton' arrived in Florence, where on 31 March 1770 George Jacob, son of Lady Adelaide Lyttelton (sic), wife of Thomas Lyttelton, was baptised by the Bishop of Ossory6 (Lyttelton was not officially married at this time). On 22 April 1770 one 'Lagttelton', presumably Thomas Lyttelton, with 'capitano Monugij'[?] and 'madama Churchall' [Churchill?] arrived in Venice.7 John Gray saw him in Venice later in 1770, describing him as 'most susceptible of delusive flattery of any I ever met with; and, should others be silent, he will trumpet forth his own excellencies'. He had again played at Venice 'like a madman' and left without settling his debts, accompanying Gray to Milan in March 1771. His mistress followed him there two weeks later.8 On 15 May he was in Turin, writing a letter introducing James Grimston and Thomas de Grey to society at Vicenza.9



A shipping agent in Leghorn mentioned by Father Thorpe; after his death in 1785 his business was continued by his son (Thorpe letters mss, 27 Apr., 7 Sep. 1776; 28 May 1785; 10 Feb. 1787; 3 Oct. 1789).
Mrs Macarthy spent 'about four years' abroad with her son, whose health was delicate.1 They left Turin on 12 October 1763 for Florence on their way to Naples (the same day as the 9th Earl of Exeter and William Patoun).2 They were in Rome on 26 December and in Naples on 21 January 1764.3 In May 1764 James Martin saw 'strong likenesses' of Mrs Macarthy and Mr Macarthy in Batoni's studio3 (the portraits remain untraced). On 22 May the Macarthys were in Genoa where Edward Gibbon visited them.4
On his way to Venice Macartney called on Thomas Coke in Padua in August 1714. They had already met in Rome, and Coke wrote that 'he intends for England in a short time; he conceals his name, and passes among foreigners for a German' (James, Coke, 188-9).
George Macartney first visited Italy as a young man in 1761. A young gentleman of Ireland, 'good natur'd and well bred', he travelled from Turin to Florence in March.1 He was in Switzerland in 1762 and 1763, meeting Rousseau (July 1762) and Voltaire (by May 1763); Lord Holland then employed Macartney as a 'companion and mentor' to young Stephen Fox in Geneva.2 In 1795 Lord Macartney was sent to Verona on a confidential mission to the exiled comte de Provence (later Louis XVIII of France), who was there from May 1794 to April 1796. Lady Webster saw Macartney in Florence on his way to Rome in October 1795,3 but he was based in Verona until Louis returned to Germany in April 1796. An anonymous portrait of Macartney, showing him holding papers addressed to him at Verona, is in the NPG. In February 1796 he was in Rome, seeing much of Lady Webster and Lord Holland,4 and the same month he went on to visit Naples,5 where the 4th Earl of Bristol saw him in March: 'they have had him at Court twice & have squeezed this China orange so close they left him with nothing but the pulp. What restless perturbed spirits he has, that in the course of his short life he has visited Petersburgh & Grenada, Madras & Pekin, & is now reduced to a mock embassy to a mock King.'6 Lady Knight saw him in Rome in April,7 and he was in back in Verona later that month. He arrived in Verona from Florence on 3 November 1796,8 and was there in January and February 1797, when he was said to be going to Naples.9



In November 1792 Macauley was setting up a banking business in Naples, where he hoped to be favoured by by Sir William and Lady Hamilton.1 His partner was to be Alexander Mackinnon, previously a merchant in Leghorn, apprenticed under [William?] Orr; Gardenstone had a good opinion of his abilities.2 In September 1793 James Byres wrote from London that Macauley intended passing through Rome to Naples each autumn and returning through Rome each spring, inferring that Mackinnon was staying in Naples.3 Mr and Mrs Mackinnon were noticed in Naples in the winter of 1792-3, and in November 1793 Mackinnon was acting as Sarah Bentham's banker.4 By April 1795 Macauley was 'in a sad way by the victory of that vile Mackkinnon',5 and by July, Mackinnon by 'masterpieces of villany'-which included sending corn procured for the British fleet to a French merchant at Genoa-had practically ruined the firm of Mackinnon and Macauley; he was confined in the Castel dell' Ovo, while Hamilton did what he could to save the scrupulously honest Macauley from bankruptcy.6 From the Castello dell' Ovo on 14 January 1797 Mackinnon wrote to William Hamilton stating that he had then spent more than seventeen months 'shut up under lock & key for twelve to fourteen hours in the twenty four and mustered every day in public before the soldiers in company with Gallery slaves'.7 Meanwhile in May 1795 Macauley had been seeking the post of consul at Naples, following the death of Sir James Douglas.8 In January 1797 Macauley, presumably the same, was acting in Naples as banker to Richard Wynne.9 There are several mentions of Alexander Macauley, 'Pubblico Negoziante Inglese', in the Naples state archive between March 1795 and July 1796, the last occasion being a legal action between Alexander Mackinnon and Alexander Macauley concerning Mrs Macauley's dowry.10 On 10 August 1799 Matthew Wade told Emma Hamilton that he had succeeded in recovering much of 'our friend Mr Macaulay's property', and a Mr Macauley, presumably the same, was writing to Captain Ball from Sicily in 1800.11

McCARTY, Irish Dominican Friar; see Nangle.
Here is one Mackdonagh who is titular Bishop of Kilmore ... a lusty man not very fat, & wears a green silk cord round his hat and seems very much trusted by the Pretender, he intends I believe to embark hence for Marseilles' (SP 98/26; Skinner, 6 Jun. 1731).
A mighty genteel and well accomplished young man', he was observed approvingly in Italy by the Abbé Grant (W. Fraser, Chiefs of Grant, 2:533; 14 Sep. 1782).


At the age of twenty-one Macdonald was considered to have 'the learning and abilities of a professor and a statesman, with the accomplishments of a man of the world'.1 He was already known as 'the Marcellus of the North' when he set out for Italy in 1765 with Ogilvie [or Ogilby] as his tutor.2They were in Paris in September and Macdonald called on Voltaire at Ferney in October. On 29 October Macdonald wrote to Sir William Pepys from Turin, saying that he proposed shortly to go to Rome and Naples 'in order to come back to the North of Italy in Summer'.3 In November he met Laurence Sterne and the two resolved to travel south together. They left on the 28th and travelled through Milan, Florence and Rome to Naples, where Macdonald's health compelled him to remain after Sterne left early in March 1766. From Rome on 5 January 1766 Macdonald told Pepys that he was leaving in two days for Naples. 'in order to return to Rome in three weeks where I intend to remain until the beginning of May'; he had had 'a soar Throat' in Turin, and a cough in Parma which 'still hangs about me'; he had seen St Peter's and the Pantheon, reflecting that 'all ages have been indebted to superstition for the Advancement of the Arts'; he remarked on the death of the Old Pretender: 'the pope it is said is in a doubt whether he shall venture to give [the Young Pretender] the title of King ... Poor man why will he give himself the air of thinking that England cares on whom he bestows Crown and sceptres'. His journey to Naples was painful: he had to stop at Capua 'dans un des plus mauvais auberges du monde' and from Capua he travelled 'en litiere'.3 His next undated letter to Pepys was from Naples and complained of 'an universal Rhumatism which confined me a month to my bed, and Room, in the most violent torture. It has left me for a month past, but I am still so weak and so much reduced by the exquisite pain'; he had managed to see Herculaneum and Pompeii and had even climbed Vesuvius; 'the satisfaction of treading that ground [the Bay of Naples] with Virgil in your hand is inconceivable'. On 3 May he wrote to Pepys from Rome, where he had been three weeks (he had given his address there as with M.Barazzi, Banquier).4 Still weak, he had confined his studies to indoors; he intended staying until June, and suggested to Pepys 'that in seven months a man may easily see everything [Italy] affords worthy of curiosity'. Despite his condition, Gavin Hamilton described Macdonald in Rome in April as promising 'to be a first rate Dilettante',5 and it was perhaps at this time that Macdonald bought a marble Venus for Lord Eglinton, which was still with William Hamilton in Naples in 1768. His last letter to Pepys was written in Rome on 5 July, three weeks before his death; 'of the six months I have been in Italy I have been confined by illness at least three. At this moment I am scarcely able to walk across my room, and am reduced to a mere skeleton by a second attack of rheumatism'; he had been laid up in Frascati where he had gone 'for the benefit of the air', and had just returned to Rome; he was determined to come home as soon as he was sufficiently strong, by Pisa or Lucca, and asked for Pepys's next letter to be directed to M. Frescobaldi, Banquier à Florence. He died in Rome on 26 July, having named the Abbé Grant as one of his executors,6 and although a Protestant he was given a public funeral (CB). He was buried near the Pyramid of Cestius beneath a column designed by Piranesi,7 and his wall monument in the church at Sleat (Isle of Skye) was designed by James Byres (whom he had met in Naples) and made in Rome (the inscription by John Symonds).8

Probably the Macdonald, a general in the Neapolitan army, who came to Rome from Naples on 6 March 1799 (BAV, Cod.Vat.10730, f.362v).

A Jacobite and a Catholic, also known as 'Pickle the Spy', Macdonell wrote to Cardinal York (Henry Stuart) from Rome on 4 September 1750, seeking a recommendation to the French ambassador in London to protect him on his return to England; he was in France in 1751 (Tayler 1941, 193-9). McDONNELMcDOWALL, William (?1749-1810) of Castle Semple, Renfrew and Garthland, Wigtown, e. s. of William McDowall MP; Glasgow U. 1761; MP 1783-6, 1789-1810; unm. William McDowall made a grand tour after 1771,1 and may be identified as the 'Mr Macdowal' who was presented at Court in Florence in November 1772 with Thomas Orde.2 On 1 March 1773 'Mr Macdoval' was in Capua, going to or from Naples, with Thomas Orde and a Mr Barre.3 'McDouwall' appears, with James Byres, John Corbet, John Talbot, Sir John Rous, John Staples and a Mr Tollemache, in a conversation piece attributed to Wickstead painted in Rome c.1773 (Ham House, and priv. coll.).4 Piranesi dedicated a plate in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778] 'Al Signor Gugliemo Macdowall Cavaliere Inglese'.


A 'low-lifed fellow void of truth',1 despised as an intriguer by John Murray of Broughton, Macgregor also used the name of Drummond (and corresponded under the cypher 'Mallock').2 In 1740 he was sent from Scotland to the Pretender at Rome; he returned to Scotland in February 1742.3 In December 1744 he went to Rome to persuade the Pretender to send his son to Paris, but he returned to Paris alone.4 He may have been the Drummond in Italy in the summer of 1747, travelling from Florence to Turin with Davison, see Davison 1747.
A Jacobite attainted in 1745, he came to Rome in the suite of the Young Pretender in 1766, but left the following year for France (Dennistoun, 2:102-3, 109).
He came to Rome from Florence in June 1723, under the name of Waller, but Stosch established he was an Irishman called Mackane who took great care to conceal his intrigues under the guise being of a painter (SP 85/14; 26 Jun.).
With his wife Elisabeth he passed a week in Venice in October 1792 with the English merchant James Bird1 and they were the 'very agreeable friends' of Thomas Parker (son of Lord Macclesfield) at Rome in December.2 They were probably the Mr and Mrs Mackay with a small daughter in Venice from 30 April to 13 May 1793.3
Mackenzie' was seen in Turin sometime after September 1739.1 He was in Siena by 4 December and in Florence by May 1740.2 By the end of June he was in Venice, where Lady Mary Wortley Montagu found him to be 'a very well behav'd Youth', rather enchanted by Lady Sophia Fermor.3 He returned to Florence and in October left for Rome with Lord Elcho.4 He did not stay, for early in November Lady Pomfret in Siena forwarded a letter from him to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, begging her to return to Venice and offering to meet her at Bologna.5 He eventually left Turin for England on 14 April 1741.6 His portrait by Dupra, presumably painted in Rome during this visit, is at Rosehaugh.7 He returned to Venice two years later in romantic circumstances.8 In London he had become infatuated with Barberina Campanini, a celebrated dancer, and he eloped with her to Venice where they intended to marry. Mackenzie passed through Lyon and arrived in Venice by November 1743, but La Barberina was forced to fulfil a contract to perform in Berlin, where Mackenzie joined her in May 1744. He was then promptly sent back to England by Lord Hyndford, the British minister (see Lord Carmichael). In 1758, nine years after his marriage to his cousin Lady Betty, daughter of the Duke of Argyll, Mackenzie was appointed envoy extraordinary at Turin.9 He arrived on 14 November 1758 with his wife and his secretary, Louis Dutens.10 Dutens described Mackenzie as possessing 'the most good qualities with the fewest faults' of all the men he had known; he was 'not fond of the pleasures of high life, but preferred the application of his time to study of the sciences, in which he was well versed, particularly in mathematics, algebra, and astronomy'. He described how Mackenzie lived in Turin 'in a splendid style, and his lady gave most magnificent entertainments'.11 In November 1760 Mackenzie was made envoy extraordinary and plenipotentiary. With the change of administration at home after the death of George II in 1760, Mackenzie was about to be appointed ambassador at Venice, but the sudden death of his uncle, the Duke of Argyll, led to his recall to take over Scottish affairs.12 In 1777 Mackenzie went to Naples for the sake of his health, accompanied by Lady Betty and Dutens.13 They spent a week in Florence, from 15-20 November,14 and passed quickly through Rome15 to arrive early in December 1777 in Naples,16 where they stayed until the following March. William Hamilton found Mackenzie 'most sensible & friendly, but entre nous dreadfully minutieux'; one who calculated all the strata of Vesuvius 'to the 100th part of an inch'.17 They went to Rome where Henry Swinburne joined them on a trip to Frascati in May,18 and it may have been on this visit that he assisted the convalescent Abbé Grant, who recalled in 1782 how 'some years ago' Mackenzie 'of his own accord had sent me more than 200 pounds sterling'.19 John Collet, the British consul at Genoa, was hoping to receive the Mackenzies in June,20 and they had returned to England by August.21 On this last tour Mackenzie acquired a number of works of art, including views of Etna and Vesuvius by Pietro Fabris (March 1778), two views of Vesuvius by Pietro Antoniani and a view of Paestum by Joli.22



A little highlander' whom James Adam met in Turin, Robert Mackinlay was 'a most curious personage and immensely entertaining'. In Rome (sometime before March 1762 when Strathmore left) he had a heated argument with the Abbé Grant concerning the merits of architects, which Lord Strathmore tried to control; James Adam then succinctly reported that Mackinlay had one eye, was very small, had been in Bedlam, and thought Robert Mylne better than Robert Adam.1 Mackinlay was said to be returning to England from Rome in May 1761,2 but he was taking up his winter quarters there in October 1762 with Henry O'Hara.3 In March 1763 they were both still in Rome, Mackinlay 'full of spirits', 'happy in using his knowledge without any fee, but with the greatest success in restoring the sick. He is drole in his Vivacity, & his Narrations, & beloved by everybody'.4 He was probably the 'Dr McKinlay' who gave James Boswell elaborate directions for his tour of Italy, including the recommendation of the antiquary Colin Morison in Rome,5 and the Dr Robert Mackinlay who met Benjamin West in Rome in 1761 and in Paris in 1763.6




Shortly after the death of William III, Macky accepted a commission 'to go to look after an Estate in the island of Zant, in the Dominion of Venice; a quarter of which belonged to him by Right of his Wife, and another Quarter to Sir Samuel Dashwood'; he travelled out through Hanover 'and other Courts of Germany'.1 'Mr Mackay of Dover' and 'Mr Worstley-Montagu' [Edward Wortley Montagu] arrived in Vienna on 3 November 1703 and were 'shortly' to wait upon the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome.2 On 3 January 1704 John Macky 'of Dover in Kent. Scotus' was in Padua.3 He was presumably the Mr Macky 'a very honest Gentleman' in Genoa in August,4 and the Mr Macky who arrived in Rome on 19 November and called on the Duke of Shrewsbury the same day.5 In August Shrewsbury had heard 'an odd story how Mr Macky had been poisoned', either innaccurate or concerning another Macky,5 see James Hales.
In August 1737 Mackye's bankers were arranging credit for him in Leghorn. It was unused by December1 when he was believed to be in Rome, where George Sinclair saw 'Mr McKay' during the Carnival on 8 and 17 February 1738.2 In April 1738 he sailed from Naples to Constantinople with Lord Sandwich, James Nelthorpe and William Ponsonby (see John, 4th Earl of Sandwich). In October they returned to Florence, whence Mackye intended to leave for England with Nelthorpe on the 21st.3

Through the generosity of Robert Foulis, he was able to send home the paintings he had done, or had acquired in Rome, free of duty (B. Skinner, Scots in Italy, 26).





In 1723 Stosch noted him as an Irish Captain in the service of the Grand Duke, a friend of the Duke of Ormonde and one who was in contact with the Pretender.1 In 1731 he was governor of the fortress of Pistoia.2
The Jacobite McMahon listed in Italy in December 1717,1 was presumably the MacMahon with the Jacobite court at Urbino in March-April 1718,2 and the McMahon who, coming from Montefiascone in October 1719, met Lord Forbes of Pitsligo leaving Rome.3
Mrs MacNamara 'with much expression in her eyes' and Mr MacNamara 'quite a character, fit for a play', were observed by Sir Charles Blagden in Geneva in September 1792.1 Sir William Forbes was a fellow lodger with them at Margherita's in Rome in March-April 1793, having previously met them at Naples (where Forbes had been between December 1792 and March 1793).2 In the second half of April 1793 they were in Florence,3 and a Mr and Mrs Macnamara, with Mr Macnamara's brother, were in Venice between 3 and 18 May.4

Donald Macpherson visited Florence in 1717 as a servant (a running footman) to the 2nd Duke of Gordon. There he remained and fathered a son, Giuseppe, who was born on 19 March 1726 and became a miniature painter of some repute.1Macpherson is reputed to have studied with Pompeo Batoni in Rome. In the 1750s he worked in London, Paris, Germany and Milan painting miniature portraits and copying old masters. In 1742 he was elected novizio of the Florentine Academy (and in 1775 consigliere).2 By 1764 he had a studio in Florence where Martin 'saw sevl Copys in Miniature taken from the Painter's Portraits in the Gallery'. Macpherson was then 'employed to do them all for Lord Cowper and has already finished a good number of them ... he has Ten Sequins' each.3 Sixty of them were shown at SS Annunziata in 1767,4 and on 20 February 1773 Cowper wrote to George III offering him 'half the collection' and a promise of 'the other half, as soon as finished'.5 This gift was accepted by the King. A year later James Bruce delivered a further 'box of pictures' and on 1 November 1777 Cowper reports that 'the collection of miniatures of the Florentine Gallery is finished for your Majesty, and I shall have the honour of presenting them myself to your Majesty soon'.6 Presumably he did this when he visited London briefly in 1786. In May 1778 Macpherson submitted his own self-portrait to the Uffizi and to mark the presentation the Grand Duke presented him with a gold medal. There are few other identified works except for a portrait of Zoffany with a group of friends (Florence, Uffizi) and a portrait of Lord Cowper (private collection) both of which date from the 1770s. In 1798 Pryse Lockhart Gordon met Macpherson's daughter in Florence [Gordon called MacPherson 'Gregory' or 'M'Gregor', a descendant of Donaldo Gregorio a running footman in the Duke of Gordon's suite] and bought from her for fifty crowns a collection of her father's works, drawings and enamels.7
Sir John spent some time abroad after his unhappy experiences in India and some alleged irregularities in his parliamentary career. He is said to have been in Florence in 1789, advising the Grand Duke on financial and administrative matters, though his qualifications were not impeccable (DNB). A tall courtly figure, he had spent the winter of 1789-90 in Rome with his companion, a Mr Macaulay,1 and together they were called 'the gentle giant and his pocket pistol'.2 Elizabeth Gibbes met him in Rome in April 1790 and again in Florence in June and July.3 Edward Taylor met him in Florence in the summer of 1790 giving 'social entertainments'.2 'Il Cavalier Mascherson'/'Marchenson' was in Venice in January-February 1791,4 and in Padua in March, where Betsey Wynne met him with a companion, Mr Johnson. She thought him 'very good-natured'. When she met him again at Wardeck in November his companion had died, and he was proposing to visit Sicily, Gibraltar and Spain before returning to Switzerland.5

The 4th Earl of Bristol brought Madden with him to Italy in 1786; Bristol had arrived at Leghorn on 28 December 1785 and was back in Ireland by February 1787. On 11 January 1787 Jacob More wrote to Lord Bristol 'I hope Mr Madden is well and making good use of his Studdies that he aquird in Rome',1 suggesting that Madden was then returned home. Early in 1787 Jacob More also referred to a letter written by Madden to Thomas Pye with orders from Lord Bristol for Pye to go to Parma,2 indicating that Madden was serving as Bristol's private secretary.On his return to Dublin Madden practised as a miniaturist, later marrying a wealthy widow and retiring to Belfast (Strickland).

He was travelling Captain Blanden and Lieutenant Cuffe, and a Colonel 'Glorver' [Glover?] was with them in Verona (ASV is 771).
An antiquary, through whom John Talman sent letters to Lord Halifax and Lord Somers in London (I. Pears, Oxford Art Jnl., 1982, 28; C. Gibson-Wood, JWCI, 52[1989]:170).
A wild Irishman', he had arrived in Turin on 7 January 1780. Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) saw him several times there, but Magan finally declined to accompany him to the south of France in March, 'after having changed his mind about fifty times'. In July Magan became infatuated with one Madame de Castion, but he 'could never muster up enough courage to speak to her'; his rejection after two meetings led to his departure and, wrote Lord Mountstuart (the British envoy), 'we have heard nothing more of him' (Pembroke Papers, 1:385, 397, 492-3).

An Irish giant, at the age of fifteen he stood 2.4 metres tall and, though mentally backward, he was persuaded to show himself in Europe. Giovanni Bianchi examined him in Florence and Pietro Longhi painted him in Venice (Palazzo Rezzonico, Venice). See The Anatomy Lesson: Art and Medicine, exh. cat. Dublin [1992], 59.
When he was in Venice in 1788 Richard Colt Hoare dined with 'Mahon' on 9 November; in 1809 the memoirs of a Mrs Gertrude Mahon, familiarly known as 'the Bird of Paradise', were said to name Hoare among her many quondam admirers (K. Woodbridge, Landscape and Antiquity, 127-8).
At Naples in May 1789 Mahon introduced Charles O'Conor to Sir William Hamilton; on 29 June Mahon had left Naples for Rome and Florence (Clonalis mss, priv. coll.; O'Conor, Naples, 29 Jun. 1789; note by M. McCarthy).
In December 1739 Lady Anne Clifford married in Paris Count James Joseph Mahony who the following year entered the Neapolitan service. They arrived in Florence from Avignon in June,1 and the Countess was in Albano later that month on her way to join her husband.2 Mahony cut a fine military figure in Naples, attaining the rank of Lieutenant General and being made governor of the fort of St Elmo.3 Their daughter Cecilia was painted as a child by Batoni (untraced).4 When her husband died in 1757 their daughter was about to marry Prince Benedetto Giustiniani. After the marriage the Countess received a pension of three hundred pounds a year from the King of Naples, 'besides about a hundred and fifty more, which she is entitled to as a General's widow'.5 The Countess continued to live in Naples and Sir William Farington saw her at one of Mrs Catherine Hamilton's conversazioni on 30 April 1765.6 In 1773 she married again, a circumstance described by James Byres in March the following year: 'she married some time ago Don Carlo Severino, the younger brother of a noble family in Apulia. This she did against the advice of all her friends, except her confessor, for Don Carlo is at least some twenty years younger than she is, and was reckon'd a little flighty, and is this summer gone quite mad. The physicians give little hope for his recovery. Lady Ann will not suffer him to be put up in a madhouse, but keeps him at home, treats him with great care and tenderness which is really dangerous considering his situation'.7 On 19 February 1774, two weeks before Byres wrote this letter, 'Monsr e Madama Mohone' had passed through Capua with a Captain Anstruther.8 It appears that the couple stayed together some time. In 1785 Lord Pembroke cryptically observed that 'Poor Made. Mahony, I apprehend, has lost her nose, & keeps her Cancer, & mad husband',9 but Byres was then saying that they were separated, the Countess having resolved 'to retire for some time to the Island of Ischia', partly, he believed, 'on account of her health and partly for oeconomy, for her connexion with Don Carlo had greatly deranged her affairs'.10 In 1785 her youthful portrait by Subleyras (Caen) was copied by the ageing Batoni, who also painted her daughter and son-in-law, Prince Benedetto Giustiniani,11 all for William Constable, her first cousin at Burton Constable in Yorkshire (see Constable). In her last years she continued her sociable existence at Naples and Ischia. Henry Quin remarked that she was 'One of the old Trouts' at a reception in Rome given by Cardinal de Bernis in January 1786,12 and in August 1787 she received Emma and Sir William Hamilton at Ischia for ten days.13 T.C. Porter called on Countess Mahony 'who lived at Ischia' in Naples on 22 December 1788,14 and Father Thorpe mentioned her there in 1791.15













In April 1791 Horace Walpole learned that Lord and Lady Malden intended going to Italy for a year, accompanied by Miss Boyle (but in the event Charlotte Boyle m. in London in August 1791 and did not go with them).1 They were in Florence in October 1791 when Lady Malden, an accomplished amateur painter, applied to make copies in the Uffizi.2 By 2 November 1791 they were in Rome.3 Lady Malden sat to Fagan, the portrait being shown at the RA in 1793, and Walpole noted that her own work improved greatly in Rome and included 'some extraordinary copies from the best masters, particularly one of a musician from Domenichino'.4 By 20 December they were in Naples, with the Malmesburys, Carnegies and Plymouths;5 the weather was appalling and Lord Malden had been indisposed early in January.6 Lady Malden was again copying in the Uffizi in February 1792,2 and the party returned to England later that year.4


Lady Malmesbury evidently persuaded her husband, the distinguished diplomat, to visit Italy in 1791-2. 'I think it very ingenious of me to bring him to a country which furnishes nothing but the things he detests - antiquities, cameos, and intaglios', she wrote to her sister, Lady Elliot, in one of a series of spirited letters from Italy.1 In October 1791 Lord Malmesbury joined her in Coblenz, with George Ellis, the man of letters who had once acted as Malmesbury's secretary in The Hague. They proposed travelling directly to Naples. At Vicenza 'Lord Malmesbury roars at the stone floors, Mr Ellis sighs and laments over England all day long', while Lady Malmesbury 'rushed out to see a famous theatre by Palladio, and did not understand it'. They passed through Padua and went by water to Venice, a seven-hour journey. They lingered in Venice, not to see the 'magnificent Titians and Tintorets' but because the washerwomen would not send home their linen. Lord Malmesbury and Mr Ellis were bored to death, but Lady Malmesbury enjoyed the Italian theatre and suggested that 'a gondola is exactly like an earwig on its back'. They eventually went on through Loreto and Terni to Rome. The first sight of St Peter's struck them as not so fine as St Paul's from the Dover road but, from closer to, Lady Malmesbury proclaimed it 'the work of giants, and giants of exquisite taste'. Ellis meanwhile continued to lament and Lady Malmesbury didn't think her party 'very gay'. They reached Naples early in December. The weather was awful and the British colony was not 'brilliant', but there was Prince Augustus living 'on potatoes and water', the Lords Bruce and Dalkeith, and the Lords Plymouth and Malden with their ladies. They met Emma Hamilton (whose Attitudes Lady Malmesbury admired) and the King and Queen of Naples. In February the sun came out and they explored the coast; 'I long to have a thousand views', wrote Lady Malmesbury, 'but drawings are so dear', artists 'make no scruple in asking you twenty-five or thirty guineas for a landscape in water-colours. Everything here in the way of art is much dearer than in England, as there are few very good artists'. By 1 April they had returned to Rome. She went to see Raphael's Transfiguration in S.Pietro in Montorio and realised 'how very little notion of the original is given you by any copies'. She was 'going to school' (i.e. undertaking a course of antiquities) with Lady Carnegie, and the Princess de Carignan showed her 'all the ceremonies', which in general she thought 'very little worth seeing', although the Pope was 'a remarkable handsome old man'. She bought 'trifling presents' and was surprised that Lord Malmesbury 'has not literally laid out a single guinea'. She came to consider the Romans far superior to the Neapolitans 'and civil beyond measure to all classes of foreigners'. By the end of April they were in Florence. The Venus de Medici was exactly Lady Malmesbury's height-'so never call me short again, as she is the model of perfection'. They again spent time with the Princess de Carignan, her uncle Prince Camille de Rohan and Madame Vigée Lebrun. Lord Malmesbury was called back home from Florence, and was in England on 2 June.2 Lady Webster was surprised to meet Lady Malmesbury with Ellis in Turin in May.3 She completed her tour with Sir David and Lady Carnegie; they were in Milan on 11 May and returned to England in August 1792.In Naples Lady Malmesbury had written 'I think my journey to Italy has given me a very perfect idea of the excess to which dirt, disease, and deformity may reach, without causing death, or even disgust, to some millions of human creatures'. A little later she concluded that Rome and Florence 'were, in fact, all Italy - and the only places I wish to stay at'.

He was presented to the Grand Duke in Florence on 29 October 1769, with Thomas Mansel Talbot, [Richard?] Leighton and Peter King; their presence in Florence had been announced on 21 October (SP 105/318, f.695. Gazz.Tosc.)

The young Lord Malton, later leader of the Rockingham Whigs, spent nearly two years in Italy with Major James Forrester. His tour was remarkable for the sculpture he acquired for Wentworth Woodhouse, the Yorkshire house which his father was then enlarging. Malton's letters to his father show that his first year's allowance (£1500) covered the period up to October 1749, and his list of people met in Italy, which is arranged by place, indicates that he had travelled through Turin, Milan and Bologna before reaching Siena in the summer of 1749.1 From Siena on 16 June he wrote to his father outlining his expenses. Lord Rockingham replied on 6 July agreeing the costs and also proposing expenditure of up to £500 on marble tables and statues 'about 6 foot high' for the eight niches in the Hall. Malton wrote again from Siena on 19 August that he would 'order here two tables of the famous yellow Sienna Marble, wch is by many preferred to the Giallo antique, I can have them here all of one piece and solid for the same money as I can have them at Room fineered'; he also intended to order in Rome 'some Tables, of the Green, and some of the yellow antique Marble.' He went on to say that 'As I hear it will be impossible to have antique Statues, and as the Models made from them in plaister of paris are so easily broke and at best but have a mean look, and will never be proper for so fine a Room as the Great Hall, I intend trying to get Copies done in Marble of the best antique statues'; he reminded his father that Lord Strafford (his distant cousin) had had four such figures which had cost him £500. Lord Rockingham was quick to reply (18 Sep.) that Strafford's figures were larger 'but of very course & spotted marble', while those for Wentworth Woodhouse should only have 'specks on the back parts', the rivalry between Wentworth Castle and Wentworth Woodhouse being a totally serious affair (see Raby and Strafford). He also passed on from his architect (Henry Flitcroft) the sizes of two large pictures required for the dining room. On 1 September Malton wrote that he had seen two large hunting pictures which might do, but their price, £100 each, was great and 'such things as these are above my venturing at'. This letter was written from Florence, where Malton had come to 'hear Opera' and he intended going on to Lucca, 'where I shall make some stay' and hear more opera; he was also going to Leghorn and returning to Siena on his way to Rome 'as soon as the Great Heats will admit me'. He had already commissioned copies of 'the Venus, Faun, Mercury, and Idol, at Rome I shall take four more of the Copies of the finest statues there'. He had bought 'a fine picture by Andrea del Sarto' for which Brand [presumably Thomas Brand, 1719-1804] had offered 40 gns., but 'it cost me much less'; 'I have an horse and another figure in Brass by the famous John de Bologna' and a painting by Vasari of the Heads of 'all the famous Italian poets'. These purchases were to be sent home from Leghorn where I 'shall go myself to see them put up'. At Siena he had left a commission for two six-foot tables, but it 'will be sometime before they are done'. 'I am in great hopes to be able to make very good bargains,' he wrote, 'for money is here very much wanted, and there are many that will sell underhand to a Stranger for less money than they would to a Fellow Citizen as then it would be known'.Lord Malton did not mention the names of the sculptors he had commissioned, but they included three of the foremost Italians in Rome. G.B. Maini carved the [Callipygian] Venus; Filippo della Valle the Capitoline Flora and the Louvre Germanicus (presumably copied from a cast), and Bartolomeo Cavaceppi the Capitoline Antinous; each closely followed the classical prototype. The remaining four statues he commissioned from British sculptors working in Italy: the Apollo and Clapping Faun in the Uffizi from Simon Vierpyl and the Venus de Medici and another faun from Joseph Wilton. Malton also acquired Vincenzo Foggini's great marble group of Samson and the Philistines (which is signed and dated Florence 1749; now VAM).2 In October 1749 Horace Mann introduced Lord Malton and Forrester to Cardinal Albani in Rome,3 but they passed quickly on to Naples where they arrived early in December, accompanied by Malton's cousin Lewis Monson Watson.4 Malton incurred some extra expenses in Naples for, he wrote on 28 January 1750, 'It was necessary to make more Figure here than in any Other Town in Italy'; but within a month he intended to be back in Rome. On 14 March he announced from Rome his intention of spending another month or eight weeks there; meanwhile the first cases of his purchases had reached London from Leghorn, including a 'marble groupe', doubtless the Samson and the Philistines. In Rome the carving of the eight statues was progressing, but Malton had to point out (15 Apr.) that as money was scarce and people so poor, he was having to pay the sculptors in advance. Eleven days later he revealed he had bought a novel harpsichord devised by an ingenious English Abbé in Rome (who had also built a new large telescope) and he had collected 'Medals or Antique Stones' for himself. Donatello's Chellini Madonna (now VAM) was doubtless part of this new collection.5 On a different subject he was pleased to tell his father that in Rome 'We expected that this Winter between the Tories & Jacobites we poor Whigs should have been quite overpowerd, I am extreamly glad to tell you that we was at least four to one, so that I hope the Vile Spirit of Jacobitism begins to cease, here is now No person of any Rank about the Pretender'. Lord Malton left Rome at the end of April, intending to 'pass the Ascension at Venice' and being in France in June; he would then, on his Father's advice, attend the King's [George II] birthday in Hanover in September.In July 1751, shortly after his return to England, Mann bought for Lord Rockingham (as Lord Malton became in December 1750) the Guercino Hagar, Ishmael and the Angel (Mahon coll.) which he had admired in Siena; 'there are few so good', wrote Mann, 'and none so well preserved'.6 Then in September 1751 Mann was called in by Albani on behalf of Cavaceppi, whose Antinous was no longer required by Lord Malton who alleged poor workmanship and defective marble.3 But the Antinous ultimately came to Wentworth Woodhouse as one of the eight fine statues for the Great Hall.


Lord Manchester was twice appointed British ambassador extraordinary to Venice,1 a city he had first visited in 1687 with his cousin Peregrine Bertie. In his first term (which falls outside the scope of this Dictionary) he stayed only four months, principally addressing the question of the reluctance of the Republic to release English sailors recruited in their service. For his second term he was in Venice from July 1707 to October 17082 (having previously spent a month in Turin without special diplomatic rank). His particular care in Venice was to attempt to break the Republic's neutrality and induce them to become allies during the Spanish Wars. He found, however, that the Venetian government 'is merely an outward show, and their neutrality has been suffered, I imagine, knowing they are not in a condition of being serviceable in any manner'.3 On 26 March 1708 there was an incident when Manchester's gondola, which should have enjoyed a diplomatic immunity, was raided and some cloth removed from it by Venetian agents; the cloth was eventually returned and the agents arrested, then released on Manchester's recommendation.4 But overall the ponderous formality of Venetian diplomacy allowed him much time to indulge his love of opera and painting. In March 1708 he told the Duchess of Marlborough (for whom he bought Venetian velvets) that 'I have so much in my thoughts music, having been in the midst of it all this winter, where there has been ten operas'.5 He sent the singer Nicolini Grimaldi to London and was trying to induce the singers Santini and Regiana to follow him. Manchester commissioned Luca Carlevarijs to record his entry into Venice (Birmingham AG), and he induced Marco Ricci and G.A. Pellegrini (see Christian Cole) to return with him to England.6 Throughout his time in Venice Vanbrugh was corresponding with him concerning the building of Kimbolton and the progress of the Italian opera at the Queen's theatre in London.7 Manchester left Venice on 12 October 1708.8
He was in Venice with his governor Pidow ['Pidou'/'Pedon'] in November and December 1791,1 and was seen in Florence the following June, about to leave.2
Lord Mandeville was in Italy in 1758 with Colonel Francis Otway as his governor.1 On 24 January 1758 Horace Mann introduced them to Cardinal Albani at Rome,2 where Mandeville sat to Mengs for a whole-length portrait (Kimbolton). He received from Piranesi a copy of the Antichita Romane before April,3 and in May was in Venice, where Lady Mary Wortley Montagu saw him dancing at a wedding party.4 On 30 May Mandeville and Otway were in Milan, and a week later in Verona; they arrived home on 31 October.5 In 1763 the 4th Duke of Manchester (as Mandeville had become) showed Horace Walpole at Kimbolton some 'paltry pictures that he bought in Italy'.6

Lord Mandeville was in Padua in May 1719,1 and appears to have gone straight to Naples. 'My Lord Mandeville arrived here [Naples] two days hence', wrote consul Fleetwood on 9 June 1719,2 and on 12 September Mandeville was writing from Naples to his father.3 His father had meantime written to the architect Alessandro Galilei (who had been working at Kimbolton in 1718-19) in Florence saying that his son 'may possibly make some stay there in order to improve himself in Architecture by your means'.4 Mandeville was probably the 'Sigr Milord Manguil' living near the Strada della Croce in Rome at Easter 1720.5 He was 'still' in Florence in August 1720,6 On 25 November he was in Bologna.7


Manley was apparently a picture dealer in Rome, where in August 1790 Mrs Manley gave birth. In September Manley and James Irvine filled five rooms with their collection of pictures. In May 1791 Manley with his wife and child were to accompany Irvine on a trip from Rome to Bologna, Milan and Turin,1 and on 10 May he obtained a licence to export seventy paintings by old masters.2 By November 1791 the Manleys were back in England.3 Manley may have returned to Rome, since seven old master paintings were exported in his name on 6 August 1793.4
As British representative at Florence for nearly fifty years, Horace Mann became the best-known of all British residents in Italy in the eighteenth century, while the subsequent publication of his intimate correspondence with Horace Walpole (Wal.Corr. 17:-27:) has made him a familiar footnote in the history of the times. His unbuttoned comments on other British travellers in Florence are used throughout this Dictionary. He had first visited Italy for his health in 1732-3 and so gravely did he take his condition that he took a coffin with him.1 In Naples he became friendly with the Baillie family and his few purchases of marble tables in Naples, made in March 1732, were sent back to England with the Baillies' baggage; see Lady Grisell Baillie. Spence also met him in Naples in March 1732.2 Mann returned to England with the Baillies, being recorded as 'Horatio Mann' in Padua on 22 June 1733 and Mr Mann, 'second son to a Gentleman of that name in Kent' at Venice in July 1733.Mann had become assistant to Charles Fane, the British minister in Florence, by February 1738 and he took over his duties when Fane returned to England in April. Through the influence of Sir Robert Walpole, and later his nephew Horace, he was rewarded in a number of ways: in 1740 he became British resident; fifteen years later he was given a baronetcy; he became envoy in 1765, and with much celebration he was invested a Knight of the Bath in 1768. He was finally appointed envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary in 1782.Mann was 'intelligent, conscientious, kind-hearted, and busy, but, although he had a sense of humour, he lacked a sense of proportion, spending far too much time and energy fussing over trifles'.3 His official duties were more significant during the early part of his career when he had to inform the English authorities, through a spy network, about the movements of the Stuart family at Rome. There was rivalry with other British informants such as Stosch, Cardinal Albani and Burrington Goldsworthy (British consul at Leghorn). He was also asked to advise on the movements of the British fleet in the Mediterranean during the War of the Polish Succession which coincided with the 1745 Stuart expedition to Scotland. Mann's letters to Walpole became noticeably excited during such crises. But Edward Gibbon astutely thought Mann's 'most serious business was that of entertaining the English at his hospitable table'.4 Mann kept open house for all British visitors and their letters and tour journals are filled with references to his kindness. As one writer put it 'his physiognomy speaks his goodness & politeness which is sometimes carried to excess'.5 He accomodated guests in Casa Ambrogi and held conversazioni on a Saturday night at his residence in the Palazzo Manetti when there was no performance at the theatre. According to Alexander Drummond 'all the apartments on the ground-floor ... were lighted up, and the garden was a little epitome of Vauxhall. These little conversazione resemble our card assemblies; and this one was remarkably brilliant, for all the married ladies of fashion in Florence were there'.6 The conversazioni continued; in 1784 Thomas Brand described how 'Old Sir Horace still winks his paralytic Eye & repeats his wonted Stories',7 but by 1785 Mann was looking 'sick and old'.8His kindness was universally acknowledged, perhaps most admiringly by the 5th Earl of Cork and Orrery: 'he does honour to our nation. He lives elegantly and generously. He never fails in any point of civility and kindness to his countrymen. The politeness of his manners, and the prudence of his conduct, are shining examples both to the Britons and Italians. He is the only person I have ever known, whom all Englishmen agree in praising. He has the art of conquering our prejudices, and taming our fierceness'.9 'The civilities of Sir Horace are amazing', wrote the 2nd Earl Fitzwilliam; 'there is never any assembly or amusement anywhere that he does not inform us of, and carry us to; Sir Horace himself contributes more to the life of this place than all the Florentines put together; he has constantly a great assembly once a week at his house (to which everybody comes) and now, at this season his garden is illuminated like Vauxhall, and is the prettiest thing in the world ... You must know,' he added, 'and between friends, Sir Horace is the most finical man in the world: if you speak a little loud, he can't bear it, it hurts his nerves, he dies - and he v-m-ts if you eat your petite patee before your soup; take him as he is, without the least notice, he is a perfect character for the stage. He has been so long out of England, that he has lost the manliness of an Englishman, and has borrowed the effeminacy of Italy. But with all his little airs, he is a good kind of man, and is very civil; and therefore nothing must be reported concerning him'.10 The young Lord Winchilsea, who was clearly fond of him, stressed Mann's hypochondria: 'I believe I never saw so fiddle faddle a man, I believe he thinks of nothing Else but his health from one end of the week to the other'.11 All Mann's energies were spent in social accomplishment. He appeared to lack a concerted interest in science or music, although he did some limited dealing in paintings and antiquities to supplement his entertainment expenses. He enjoyed his own private circle of effete friends, principally the painter Thomas Patch and the 2nd Earl Tylney, but his epistolary affair with Horace Walpole remains his best known relationship. After his death it was quickly observed that 'Florence is a dull Town no Society for Eng: since the death of Sir H. Mann',12 and few British representatives abroad ever matched his discriminating generosity.
When Horace Mann was made a Baronet in 1755 it had been stipulated that his nephew Horatio should succeed to the title. Horace had first considered inviting his nephew to Florence in 1757, there being, he thought, 'no place more proper for the education of youth than this', but then realised he was too young.1 Horatio, who grew up into an easy-going and sporting gentleman, had first intended seeing his uncle in October 1774, but was recalled on his election to Parliament. That winter, however, he set out with his wife, Lucy, who was in delicate health, and an infant daughter to spend the winter in the south of France. In May 1775 they arrived in Florence2 where his uncle wrote that 'the sight of him has renewed all my affection for his father', while Lady Lucy was 'most amiable'. His nephew was 'exempt from all the extravagant follies of the age', and they were able to live together on 'the most easy footing'. In July and August they were in Valdagno (near Vicenza), where Lady Lucy took the waters; in September they were back in Florence and they left at the end of October to spend the winter in Naples. Their journey was leisurely, for they were still in Rome in mid-December, when Patrick Home described losing money at cards to Horatio Mann and Sir John Lindsay, but by the 19th they had left for Naples.3 Lady Lucy's health, however, did not improve there and, being advised that a sea voyage would be beneficial, they left Naples on 19 June 1776 to sail to Barcelona. They spent the next winter in France before sailing to Leghorn and returning to Florence in April 1777. They stayed until November when they set out for Nice, where Lady Lucy died on 11 February. Horace was much affected by her death and Horatio went off to Germany. He returned to Florence to stay with his uncle between July and September 1778, when he returned to England. Horatio subsequently paid regular visits to his uncle, usually of some two months duration. 'He makes no more of a journey to Florence than of going to York races', Horace wrote Walpole (24 Feb. 1783). His relationship with his uncle continued to be close: 'my nephew has made me very happy for a short time', Mann told Walpole on 25 October 1781, and he later confessed that 'I cannot in conscience endeavour to persuade [Horatio] to stay longer from his family and affairs' (11 Sep. 1784). Horatio had not sought reelection to Parliament in 1784 and his uncle hoped that his free inclinations 'will lead him to make me frequent visits' (11 Sep. 1784).4 When Horatio next came to Florence in April 1785 he found his uncle in poor health. He told Walpole 'I feel my society too necessary to him to have the least thoughts of leaving him'. He had brought with him 'another nephew' James Mann, who had come to seek old Sir Horace's approval for his marriage to Lucy Mann, Horatio's daughter. Horatio, meanwhile, 'besides every other most tender and affectionate office', was helping his uncle to receive visitors. He left Florence on 6 February 1786.5 He returned in September, and was attending his uncle at his death in November 1786. Horatio was then instructed from London to remain in Florence as the British representative until his uncle's successor was announced. This was not a satisfactory episode. He was offered £2 a day, which he scornfully rejected, preferring to live on his own resources. In April 1787 he went to Rome for Holy Week and met the Duke of Gloucester. In May he heard of William Fawkener's nomination to succeed his uncle (though it was, eventually, to be John, Lord Hervey), and he stayed only to receive the Duke of Gloucester and his party in Florence between 24 and 27 May. On 31 May he handed over his official papers to John Udny, the consul at Leghorn, and returned home.6
In 1785 he came to Florence with Horatio Mann to see his uncle, Sir Horace Mann, seeking approval of his marriage to Lucy Mann, Horatio's daughter. The 'nephews' arrived in April and the necessary permission was granted, at which, wrote Horace Mann, 'he ran into my room with tears of joy to express his happiness'.1 James stayed only a fortnight in Florence before going on to Rome and Naples. He was in Rome in July, and thereafter made a tour of Lombardy before returning to Florence in September. Both Horatio and James had returned to England by March 1786.2




He had arrived in Rome from Vienna with Sir Thomas Stradling by 25 March 1737.1 In August he was in Florence.2

Mansell, who was said to have Jacobite tendencies, was in Padua on 21 January 1715,1 and set out from Venice for Rome on 22 February with Lord Essex and Lord Morpeth (later 4th Earl of Carlisle).2 William Kent noticed him in Rome on 16 April with Sackville Tufton.3 Mansell was in Turin late in 1716, and had returned to Paris by November 1716.4 He came again to Rome on 24 November 1721, Rawlinson then recording the arrival of 'Mr Mansell, son to the Lord of that name, and one Colonell Hatton from Florence'.5

Maunsell' or Mansell was in Rome in March 1763.1 Mansell dined with James Martin in Naples on 30 December that year, and met him there again with a Mr Winsley on 9 February 1764.2 He was probably also the 'Mr Mil.Monsual' staying near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1765.3
As Secretary of State for Scotland, Mar had proclaimed King George who, however, had received him with indifference. Mar changed his allegiance and within a year was leading the Jacobite forces at Braemar and Sheriffmuir, initially without the Pretender's authorisation. 'Bobbing John' frequently changed his opinions, and his vacillation, together with his arrogance and military incompetence, contributed to the Jacobite failure.1 In April 1716 he fled from Scotland with the Pretender to Avignon. He was now his Secretary of State (succeeding Bolingbroke), but he nevertheless left his master at the Italian frontier in February 1717, to visit his wife in Flanders and have secret talks with the British government in Paris. In November 1717 he rejoined the Pretender in Urbino, coming through Padua to Venice, with which he was 'much delighted' (5:341).2 He had told the English Resident, Cunningham, that he had come 'for a few days to see the place and hear the music, and not to disturb your government at home or meddle with any kind of politics' (5:182). He left Venice on 13 November, was in Bologna on 17 November and he had reached Urbino by 25 November (5:212, 233).It was to be a dull winter and the weather was awful. 'I could not believe that there was ever such winters in any place of this country and will think the better of our own island afterwards' (5:464). There was abundant time to write letters complaining of boredom: 'one day being as like the other as two eggs and these eaten without either pepper or salt' (5:487). 'I do not wonder the people of this country give themselves to music, architecture, etc., since they are in a manner out of communication with the world' (5:314). Music was their principle amusement 'and some pretty good voices and excellent instruments we have, who perform sometimes in my rooms, where our Master looks in ... All this amusement though does not make this place and idle life by any means agreeable, For God's sake let us out of it soon and something to do' (5:341, 368). Apart from music there was 'shuttlecocks or cleckings to give us some exercise' (5:382). In January 1718 he told Colonel John Stewart at Rome that he envied him 'the buildings you see and the music you hear', at the same time enclosing some drawings he had made of a little house,3 with the request that a good architect should draw proper elevations from them (5:382); but the Roman architect 'made a goose pie of my plan', wrote Mar who added a comment on the 'degeneracy of the present Romans' (6:162). On 28 March Mar left Urbino to spend some five weeks in Rome (6:204). Frascati in April 'by its natural as well as artificial beauties' put him in mind of Richmond (6:374). He met the Pope with whom he conversed in 'the best ill French I could muster up', but apparently enjoyed more the 'noble idea of the greatness of the Romans' offered by the Baths of Diocletian and the pictures in Don Olivio's collection (6:318, 375). His portrait in miniature was painted in June by G.F. Ramelli (Abbot of the Canons Regular of the Lateran), who had heard from Trevisani that such a portrait would be acceptable (6:517). Trevisani was to paint Lady Mar and her daughter in Rome, probably in 1719 (priv. coll.). John Alexander looked after some commissions from Mar, including works by one Caputi, who in June 1718 had 'ended one of the Ios and the other is well advanced', see John Alexander. Mar returned to Urbino in May.Late in 1718 Mar's wife and daughter arrived in Italy, having survived a hazardous journey from England.4 But within three months of their arrival Mar left Rome, ostensibly for Genoa, though the plan was that he should join the Pretender in Spain for another armed attempt on England. But Mar had already drafted his letter of resignation and he never saw the Pretender again. He was now playing a double game, maintaining his Jacobite ties while trying to open up communication with the British government. He travelled to Genoa with Lord Perth, but chose to enter Milanese territory (controlled by George I's ally, the Emperor) and they were duly interned in Milan. Released in March, Mar returned to Rome, quarrelled violently with James Murray (later the Jacobite Earl of Dunbar) and left on 9 April 1719 for Geneva, sending his seals of office to the Pretender in Spain. He left his wife and daughter in Rome.Mar was again detained by the British government in Geneva, where his wife and daughter joined him there in December 1720. Lady Mar had not been well treated by John Murray while the Pretender was in Spain, but when she left Rome in October the Pretender wrote to her that 'the loss of yr good company att Rome this winter will be a mortification to us'.5

At the age of eighteen Lord March had married the thirteen-year-old daughter of the 1st Earl of Cadogan, in order to cancel a gambling debt between their parents. He immediately left on his grand tour and did not see his bride again until 1722. He was accompanied by Thomas Hill, his tutor since 1711. They apparently did not reach Italy until 1721, when they were in Padua on 10 January,1 and went on to Venice for the Carnival.2 They were in Rome on 6 April,3 'retired some leagues' in order to avoid 'any insults on account of their religion'.4 On 27 May Rawlinson saw 'a picture of the Marquiss of March ... at the house of Hieronymo Peschi [Girolamo Pesci]' along side 'a draught of the Chevalier's Spouse with her Son'.3 They went on to Naples and came back through Florence, where, after their departure, Thomas Dereham forwarded a packet received from Naples. March was considering revisiting Venice and was said to be leaving Italy at the end of October,5 but he was writing to his mother from Parma on 23 December, and was later in Milan. He was finally reunited with his wife at The Hague by the end of May (and he found her far more attractive than before).6Twelve years after his visit he wrote some introductions to Roman society for his friend the antiquarian Martin Folkes. Cardinal Albani, he wrote, 'is a very odd Cur, Ignorant enough, & proud as Hell, butt has the finest library, one of them, in Europe, & without exception the very best collection of bustos in the world. You must flatter him on his learning, & bon gusto. The Princess Pamphili is the ugliest woman in the world. Damn'd proud also, and stark staring mad, butt a Devilish deal of Witt'.7

Lord March (better remembered as the lecherous 'Old Q') was in Padua on 6 June 1746,1 and came through Florence in September and October,2 to reach Rome in November. Cardinal Albani befriended him, with Sir Thomas Sebright, George Treby and Fane, all Scottish gentlemen introduced by Horace Mann.3 By 22 November, still with Sebright and Treby, he had arrived in Naples4 (where six years later the Princess de Palma Reggio remembered Lord March as one she had been very much in love with).5 In February 1747 March was in Florence, attending a ball in the Via della Pergola at which he proposed that nine English freemasons, who had performed a special dance, should fight the Italian impresarii who objected to this interruption of their entertainment.6 Mann subsequently refered to one Davison as having travelled with Lord March.7


Already over forty and an established gem-engraver, Marchant set out for Rome late in 1772, his patron the 4th Duke of Marlborough helping him with his expenses.1 He sought to establish himself in Rome, the centre of trade in ancient gems and the richest market for modern engravers. He arrived in January 1773,2 and at Easter was living on the Strada Paolina; in 1774 he moved to the Palazzo Piombini in the Via Babuino (near the gem-engraver Costanzi), and the painters Solomon Delane and Henry Tresham shared the same address, respectively in 1774-5 and 1778-9; finally in 1786 Marchant moved to a palazzo in the Strada Felice, once Piranesi's home and then belonging to his son Francesco.3 Marchant appears to have spent nearly all his time in Rome, though he visited Naples in 1775 and 1786-7, Florence and Venice, and in April 1784 he went to Tivoli with James Barry.4 Within a year of his arrival Father Thorpe remarked that Marchant's growing reputation was likely to equal Pichler's.5 Unlike Pichler, Marchant deliberately concentrated on intaglio engraving from antiquities. In 1774, for example, he sent for exhibition at the SA a head of Antinous, 'after the original in the Villa Albano'; many of his subjects came from the new Pio Clementino museum, and later he stressed that the most distinguished province of the art he professed lay in the choice of subjects from those estimable remains of ancient art, of which he was the first Englishman to have examined on the spot, including the very considerable discoveries made while he was in Rome.6 He was a hard worker, whom Flaxman later classified as one of the 'worthy men who set a better example' to visiting artists.7 Marchant enjoyed the most distinguished patronage. Among his few portraits were those of Pope Pius VI in 1781, and the Empress Catherine II of Russia in 1788 (from a painting) for King Stanislaus II, as well as Emma, later Lady Hamilton (1786-7). He undertook commissions for the Duke of Gloucester and the Countess of Albany (the Young Pretender's wife). Antiquarians such as Charles Townley and Richard Payne Knight, the painter Philipp Hackert and the sculptor Thomas Banks were among his admirers, but most of his business came through British travellers. Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) met him in September 1779, describing him as 'an English Sculptor, much employed by the Duke of Marlborough, who has great merit, very modest and many Judges reckon him the first in his profession.'8 The next year, when he was commissioning an intaglio for his mother, Lord Herbert told her 'you know [Marchant] is a rigid moralist as to his plighted word, & nothing could have persuaded him to have thrown aside some other commissions, but his devotion to you & friendship for me'.9 In 1788 Lord Gardenstone wrote that Marchant, 'a sculpture engraver, with an open generosity of heart, is great in his profession'.10 By then Marchant was about to return home; in April 1788 he told his friend Flaxman that he would shortly be in England 'with a large collection of plaisters'.11 Pacetti recorded his departure from Rome on 2 September 1788,12 and he was presumably the 'Mons. Marchant' who arrived in Venice on 20 September.13 Soon after his return Charles Long met him in London and was not impressed: 'that such a driveller should have attained to any thing like perfection at an art wch requires taste and judgment is a problem to me'.14 In 1792 Marchant published his Catalogue of one hundred Impressions from Gems, a selection of his Italian work, the frontispiece designed by the Countess Spencer and the subscribers list headed by the Prince of Wales and the Duke of Gloucester. Flaxman was to carve his monument at Stoke Poges church, with the inscription: 'his skill and industry as a gem-engraver had supplied the place of patronage by enabling him to remove to Italy and cultivate an art to which his genius strongly inclined him'.

After the failure of the 1715 rebellion, the 9th and last Earl Marischal, a staunch Jacobite, retired to the Continent. He spent most of the remainder of his life abroad, in Spain and then in Prussia where he became a favourite of Frederick the Great. He made several short visits to Italy, initially to the Jacobite court in Rome while he was based in Spain. The first was immediately after the failure of the Jacobite expedition to Scotland which he had commanded. With his younger brother, James Keith, he arrived by sea at Genoa in January 1720; they sailed on to Leghorn, stopping at Portofino to visit Cardinal Alberoni. Passing through Pisa, Florence and Siena they came to Rome and lodged near the Piazza di Spagna ('Sigr Keich' and 'Milord Mareschal').1 After six weeks the brothers returned to Leghorn and thence again to Genoa. After a further six weeks they sailed back to Spain.2Keith was again in Rome in 1730, but was reported as leaving in October, 'in high disgust of [James] Murray's administration'.3 Then in May 1731 he set out from Seville to return to Rome where he spent the summer at the Jacobite court. On 1 August he wrote to his brother that he would 'much rather live among the Calmucks, encamping with them, than lead this life',4 but he appears to have stayed on, apparently in some sort of official capacity. There is a letter from him while acting secretary to the Pretender, dated Rome, 22 August 1731, and Stosch referred to the 'Earl Marshal' in Rome in November.5 Early in January 1732 he was reported to have left Leghorn for Rome,6 where he remained until at least October, probably, as Elizeus Burges suggested, because 'he don't know where else to go'.7 There are letters from him written in Rome on 6 May and 30 October 1732,8 and one of his portraits, attributed to Placido Costanzi in or before 1733, was probably painted in Rome (NPG).In March 1733 he came to Venice from Rome en route for Milan and perhaps Paris and Spain.9 In January 1736 Stosch reported that the Earl Marischal was again expected in Rome, where he would stay in the Pretender's palace; he had commissioned Costanzi to paint a battle scene between an old Scottish King and the English10 (The Battle of Bannockburn). In January 1746 he arrived in Venice 'from Muscovy. He calls himself Baron Keith [and has] taken a house in a remote part of the town, where, he says, he hopes to be allowed to pass the remainder of his days in quiet, being tired of the world'.11 He bought a summer house at Treviso and found a sympathetic companion in Lord Elcho. He was still in Treviso in November 1747, but left soon after to join his brother at the Prussian Court in Berlin. In 1751 Cosmo Alexander in Rome was buying Costanzi's prints and drawings for him, and completing the Bannockburn picture.In 1759 he visited Genoa as he travelled from Neufchâtel to London.12The following references may also refer to George Keith: 'Barone di Keith, prussiano' was in Florence on 4 May 1776,13 and a 'Miledo Eith e figlia' arrived in Venice on 14 May, though it is not known that he ever had a daughter.14 Lord Keith wrote in French from Mantua on 5 February 1778 to deny having been involved in a fracas with another officer, as reported in the Gazzetta Toscana (though he was then eighty-two years old and d. on 28 May that year).15

The Duke of Marlborough travelled in Italy with his brother Lord Charles Spencer. By the beginning of November 1760 they were in Turin, where Lord Charles succumbed to a passion for Mme St-Gilles (the contessa di San Gillio), and where Marlborough was noticed in January 1761.1 In May they were in Venice for Ascension.2 In June they took a house in Padua for the opera season2 and the Duke purchased most of Zanetti's collection of gems at this time.3 Though they had intended to go on to Rome, they decided to return to London for the Coronation of George III on 22 September 1761.2 They turned back from Bologna at the end of July/early August, passing through Turin on 10 August.4 Robert Adam said their absence from Rome was much regretted: Thomas Jenkins had been making 'extraordinary preparations' for their visit and the Abbé Grant had received 'I don't know how many petitions and applications from all ranks, recommending cooks, valets-de-chambres, fencing masters &ca.' The Duke was back in London on 28 August.5In April 1773 count Ludovico di Barbiano di Belgioioso was recommending that three blind violinists just arrived in Milan should be invited to perform before the Duke of Marlborough in his house there.6
The itinerary Marlow followed on his tour of France and Italy is well documented by paintings and drawings, but none of these is dated. An unidentified obituary notice (of 14 January 1813) stated that he 'went on his travels to France and Italy in 1765 by the advice of the late Duchess of Northumberland', and a group of eight Italian paintings (Tivoli, Arriccia, and scenes in the Bay of Naples) at Alnwick Castle supports the assertion.1 A drawing of an English river scene (Sotheby's, 1 Apr. 1976) is inscribed 'William Marlow the Author of this Drawing was a Disciple of the ingenious Mr Samuel Scott (Painter of Sea Views, Ec.) and is now studying in Italy - July 8th 1765', and, according to Hayward, Marlow reached Rome in February 1766.2According to the large collection of sketches and drawings Marlow made in Italy, as well as the numerous paintings and watercolours which he did after his return to England, it is evident that he visited Venice, Florence, Rome and the Campagna and Naples and environs (including Capri). From the sketches he made Marlow subsequently worked up pen and ink compositional drawings from which his patrons in England ordered versions in either oils or watercolours. Several of his more popular grand tour souvenir subjects are as a result known in numerous versions.Marlow probably returned to England towards the end of 1766. He showed his first Italian subjects, four oils, at the SA in 1767 (the exhibition opened on 22 April 1767) and, since he does not appear to have painted in oil while he was abroad, he must have prepared these over the winter months. Thereafter he regularly showed Italian and French views, and it is evident that he was a major source of such works for English buyers.

The 'Maratt' who arrived with Aufrere in Venice on 8 May 1787,1 was presumably the 'Marratt' whom T.C. Porter met in Venice, dining with 'his friend Broughton' on 6 May 1788.2
A great friend of Lord Morpeth and his family' he accompanied the Lords Morpeth and Boringdon to Italy in 1793. In Naples and Rome he became part of Lady Webster's immediate circle, with Thomas Brand and Lord Holland. She admired his scholarship and conversation, describing him as 'one of the few rational beings I met with', and she took him on excursions to Cumae and Tivoli (Holland Jnl., 1:22, 124-6).
Mr Marsh was noticed by James Russel in Rome in May 1750; he was then anticipating being in England 'in about three or four months time'. On 31 July 1753 Russel was sending home from Rome some drawings for a Mr Marsh, probably the same (Add.41169, ff.45v, 68v).





Martin was in Florence from 1728, living as an artist and dealer. In 1732 he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno.1 In 1733 he executed three pastel portraits of members of the Baillie family, of which two are now at Mellerstain (see Lady Grisell Baillie). He was apparently a member of the Masonic Lodge in Florence (described as 'David Martin', a Scottish Catholic portrait painter; but the Lodge had ceased in 1737, before David Martin arrived).2 At Florence in February 1740 'Martin an English painter' took offence at personal remarks made by an elderly nobleman and challenged him to a duel; Horace Walpole described 'a little figure, pale but cross, with beard unshaved and hair uncombed, a slouched hat, and a considerable red cloak, in which was wrapped, under his arm, the fatal sword,' awaiting his opponent who, however, declined to fight with one who was 'no cavalier'.3 In June 1741 'Martin, a painter' was the constant companion of the unhappy Erasmus Philipps.4 In 1751 Charles Martin received 40 sequins from Ralph Howard for a copy of Raphael's Madonna della sedia and in 1752 James Tyrrell told Howard he hoped the Madonna had arrived safely and that Martin was 'our Tuscan Raphael in the crayon way'.5 Cochin saw his collection in Florence in 1749.6
David Martin set out to join his master, Allan Ramsay, in Rome in the autumn of 1755, his journey paid in part by Robert Alexander, an Edinburgh banker.1 He had been asked to bring out Ramsay's drawings (to be shown at the Accademia di S.Luca), but his intended start from London that summer was delayed, which annoyed Ramsay.2 It is known that he brought back from Italy a Boy's Head by Correggio which the Abbé Grant had in Rome.3 He may have returned with Ramsay in 1757 and he was certainly in London by 1759.

James Martin's journal of his grand tour (Martin jnl.mss) furnishes a detailed itinerary, and a scrupulous listing of sights. Of particular interest are his accounts of artists and fellow travellers (and consequently many of his remarks will be found in other entries in this Dictionary). He had spent three months in France before reaching Genoa on 8 October 1763 and within ten days he had reached Florence, where he stayed for six weeks. There were Burlettas given by Lord Fordwich (later 3rd Earl Cowper), allowing Martin to judge Lady Spencer 'much handsomer than any of the Italian ladys', conversazioni at Madame Acciaioli's, and he was often with Madame Bizzani and her daughters. He frequently met Thomas Patch, in whose studio he noticed 'several Pictures of different kinds Two of Caricaturas very well executed' (6 Nov.), and the artist took Martin and Lord Ossory to see frescoes in a convent said to be by 'the first painter' Cimabue (12 Nov.). In the Arnaldi Palace he noted that 'all the Pictures that were good there are sent to Engd.' and William Kent the dealer had bought many of the best pictures collected by Baurries [Borri], a tailor (29 Nov.). He met Ignazio Hugford ['Mr Hickford'], 'a very civil man and shewed us all his Pictures with much Politeness. There seems to me to be much trash & but very few good ones' (30 Nov.). He was pleased with statues and busts in Francis Harwood's studio (2 Dec.). He went on to Siena for nine days before continuing to Rome, his journey delayed by floods. His first stay in Rome was for only two weeks, during which he visited Cardinal Albani (to whom he had been introduced by Horace Mann),1 and attended a concert at the Barberini Palace. On 29 December he reached Naples, having travelled from Rome on horseback. He was presented to the King on 1 January 1764 and he admired the new palace being built at Caserta, though 'a Scarcity of Money' made progress very slow. In the old palace he remarked on the pictures by Mengs [Minx] and Sebastiano Conca (14 Jan.). He visited Angelica Kauffman's studio on 8 January and there admired her portrait of the 9th Earl of Exeter. In his travels around Naples (which included Portici, Pozzuoli, Baiae, Capri and Ischia) he took particular note of Paestum (carefully describing the temples). On 14 February he sailed to Sicily, reaching Messina on the 19th.; he went on to Malta (20-29 March) and returned to Naples on 28 April. On 5 May he was back in Rome where he spent most of the next six months.He led a full social life, attending concerts, and often going with the Abbé Grant to the Villa Albani (which he described with a sense of wonder; 14 Jul.). He had an audience with the Pope on 8 June (in which there was talk of the amusements proposed for the Duke of York in Venice). Martin mixed freely with other travellers, and appears to have been easily absorbed into the artist community. He saw as much of Thomas Jenkins as of James Byres, and on 10 October he dined with them both in his rooms. On 17 May he began one of Byres's courses of antiquities (and he also had drawing lessons from a Mr Reiffenstein). Byres gave him lessons in architecture, took him to an Arcadian Society meeting and introduced him to the artists Alves, Crone and Nevay, the gem-engraver Pichler and the architect Baxter, as well as to Maron ('a German painter who has studyed a considerable time in Rome & is esteemed one of the best Artists particularly for copying History') and the French painter Volaire. Byres and Martin went to Tivoli together on 18 June. Jenkins is described as a friendly dealer, whose growing collections Martin several times described. Jenkins took him to see Cavaceppi, 'a great Statuary & particularly eminent for restoring those of Antiquity'; in his studio he noticed 'a great number of Jesses, Models, copys &ca of the most eminent statues in & about Rome' (6, 19 Jul., 29 Sep.). He described the bronze-casting process in Cavaceppi's studio and Jenkins showed him jesses being made (19 Jul.). Martin visited the studios of many other British artists: Delane, Forrester, Nollekens, Norton, Nulty, Patoun and Willison. Several times he visited Batoni's studio (6, 11 May, 4 Jun., 20 Jul., 23 Sep., 12 Oct.), but Mengs was then in Spain and Martin was received by his daughter the miniature painter (23 Jun., 12 Oct., the second visit with Byres). He met Piranesi (25 Sep.) and the German painter Stern (30 Jul.). But he seems to have been closest to Angelica Kauffman and her father, Nathaniel Dance, Gavin Hamilton and Colin Morison. Their names frequently recur together, including one occasion in September when they spent four days at Gavin Hamilton's villa at Frascati.Throughout his extensive contact with art and artists, Martin describes rather than evaluates, and he seems to have left no commissions nor made any purchases. Despite this blandness, he was not devoid of originality. He described the monuments to Raphael and Annibale Carracci in the Rotunda as resembling (respectively) a Methodist preacher and Oliver Cromwell (19 Oct.), and he noticed that modern painters touched 'very devoutly' with their pencils Raphael's skull in the Accademia di S.Luca (24 May). One Paravagna, a dealer in prints, caught his fancy: 'a Dealer in Hats & so ignorant that he can neither read nor write but having an excellent natural Taste for Designs He has made a large collection of Prints, He draws vastly well' (21 Jul.). His description of some drawings by Salvator Rosa belonging to the artist's great-grandson as 'so very rude & upon such paper that they don't make a very agreeable Appearance' (26 Jul.), is a rare pronouncement.In the course of his six months at Rome Martin made a six-week excursion to Bologna. He left Rome on 1 August and went via Terni, Santa Casa (where he saw maiolica, 'earthen Vessels finely painted by Raffael'), and Faenza. In a merchant's house at Bologna he saw 'a collection of above thirty Landskips by Poussin. They belonged to the Aldovrandi [Aldrovandi] Family', but two or three of them 'don't appear like Poussin's Painting' (16 Aug.). He met la Corrilla, 'commonly known by the name of the Poetess', with a gift for improvisation. (18 Aug.). There was a public Festa at which food and money were thrown to the mob in the Piazza Grande, which Martin denounced as 'a Gothic manner of Entertainment' (26 Aug.). He went on through Modena and Reggio to Parma, where he admired Correggio, before returning to Bologna and Rome.Martin finally left Rome on 4 November and spent three weeks in Florence. He continued to visit artists. He renewed his acquaintance with the sculptor Harwood and with Patch, in whose studio he saw copies of the two Salvator Rosas from the Acciaioli collection recently sold to Lord Spencer. It was perhaps Patch's influence which led him to notice the Masaccio frescoes in S.Maria del Carmine when he visited the church with Matthew William Peters (whose studio he also visited). From Florence he made an excursion to Vallambrosa where he admired the scagliola work of 'Father Huckford' [Ferdinando Hugford] who was then away in Florence. He returned to Florence for three days, in which he visited the hotelier Hadfield's handsome villa and saw scagliola work by Lamberto Gori. His journey to Venice via Bologna and Ferrara was unpleasant, with 'disagreeable flat country' and abominable roads.He spent over two months in Venice, from 13 December to 22 February 1765 but he was not at ease in the 'dark and ill furnished' rooms of the Ridotto. For one who hated play, the wigged bankers in their fur-lined blue robes, the masked gamblers and the pickpockets provided 'very dull amusement' (26 Dec.). He found it odd that women should have to disguise themselves to see Veronese's Marriage at Cana in the convent of S.Giorgio, where women were not admitted (20 Dec.). Titian's Murder of S.Peter Martyr in SS.Giovanni e Paolo and his altarpiece in the Frari, he found neglected and damaged (28 Dec.). He attended several of the conversazioni held each evening at Madame Cordalini's, 'in a large Room without any Fire Place'. He admired the picture collection of the resident John Murray (12 Jan.) and visited a glass manufactory which held 'an exclusive Privilege' for making ornaments for Feast days which were melted into other forms after use (31 Jan.). Martin went on to Padua and noticed the unfinished Pisani villa on the Brenta which contained a Turkish room. In the large hall of the Town House were 'still very lately Paintings by Giotto but having been damaged by Lightning they are replaced by those of a modern Paduan'. The same day he met the aged Tartini, now 'subject to a Trembling of his Right arm, so that he can very seldom play'; he bought twelve of his sonatas and others were to be forwarded to Martin in Turin (23 Feb.). In Vicenza he admired the Palladian theatre and the Villa Rotunda, which he was able to relate to Burlington's Chiswick House and Colen Campbell's Mereworth (25 Feb.). At Verona he met the painter Cignaroli, whose composition and colouring he did not like (26 Feb.). He frequently saw Madame Simonetta at Milan, her house elegantly furnished in the French style and he noticed 'a great number of very bad Paintings' at Stupinigi which he visited during the four weeks he spent in Turin. He crossed Mont Cenis on 27 April, having spent eighteen months in Italy.




An Irish guide, who had been in service to an Archbishop in Ireland and who, by 1770 was 'well known to all our countrymen', in Savoy.1 In 1785 Richard Colt Hoare remarked that Martin 'first introduced potatoes into [Savoy] about twenty five years ago'.2

Martyn left England in 1778 to travel on the Continent for two years with his wife and young son and with his ward and pupil Gerard Hartopp.1 Hartopp was noticed in Florence in December 1779,2 and Martyn in Rome in January 1780, when Hippisley called him 'a good man',3 and Thomas Jones listed him.4 He was still there in April.5 In an undated letter to John Strange, Martyn thanks him for his civility in Venice and sends respects from Mr Hartopp and a Count Baselli; he sent further letters to Strange, from Verona on 8 July, saying he had been to Vicenza, and from Trent on the 13th.6 After his return Martyn acquired a set of six paintings by Guardi for his College (untraced) and sought Strange's help in finding a suitable altarpiece for Sidney Sussex (the Nativity by Pittoni acquired in 1783); in the course of this correspondence he described Mr Hartopp as having 'no taste, nor money to spare'.7


Tommaso Mason Inglese' was living on the Strada Laurina in Rome at Easter 1769,1 and was probably the Thomas Mason who spent the winter of 1772-3 at Naples. He wrote two letters to James Forrester, dated 14 December 1772 and 27 February 1773, principally describing paintings he had seen but also revealing that he had previously been in Rome, where he had met Batoni, Jenkins, Timothy Collopy and other artists.2 He was in Florence applying to copy in the Uffizi in May 1773, February 1776, June and October 1777 and August 1785,3 but whether he was in Italy throughout this period is not known. Robert Harvey described a Mason in Rome in September 1773 who produced portraits 'like good sign posts', but the name may be a misreading of Maron, see Harvey. A 'Tommaso Masson' was staying in Venice in February 1791.4
Once said to be 'the most superlative coxcomb that ever Ireland bred',1 he went to Italy in 1762 with a tutor, Mr Hutchinson, son of the Bishop of Killala. Lord Massereene attended the Academy at Turin. In May 1762 Phelps told Horace Mann that Hutchinson 'who has had the pleasure of being known to you before at Florence' and Massereene were the only remaining English there; 'as to his young Lord he is lively, and does not want sense but does not carry his balast in the right place: he wears lead in his shoes, is always dancing & cutting capers, and famous for breaking thro' all the rules of the Academy'.2 On 8 October the British minister George Pitt wrote from Turin introducing them to Horace Mann in Florence,3 and on 22 October Phelps again wrote to Mann describing Massereene as 'the strangest mixture of a Character I ever met with;' his great passion was dancing, 'which he does not execute ill notwithstanding his figure is the worst calculated for such an exercise', but he also showed a 'determined Obstinacy in never doing anything that he is told is right, and an insensibility of shame after being convicted of the grossest improprieties. Add to these a dirty scandalous Avarice, that would not be pardonable in a miser of threescore' - all of which, wrote Phelps, 'would make me shoot him like a wild Goose if he was a son of mine'.3 In March 1763 they were returning to Rome from Naples, and were expected to proceed to Bologna and Venice in April.4 Hutchinson apparently travelled from Rome to Naples separately with Thomas Tighe, with whom he was in Capua on 4 February.5 In Rome Lumisden wrote that Massereene 'has been laughed at by the Italians, as well as by his own countrymen, on account of his theatrical dancing'.6 In May 1763 they were in Venice, Massereene attending Lord Northampton's official entry as ambassador.7




Sir James Hall met him in Turin with the British envoy John Trevor on 14 October 1784,1 and on 31 March 1785 Lord Grey de Wilton saw him with Thomas Jenkins in Rome.2
A Jacobite, he was in Italy with Alexander Wemyss, both allegedly having come from 'their studies at Leiden'. They left Leghorn on 13 September 1733 for Bologna and Venice: 'Mather says that he is from Derbyshire but has been some years in Scotland, he is about thirty ... Wemyss seems to be about one or two and Twenty, Brownish complexion, little in stature and very slender, speaks broad Scotch and makes no Scruple ... of owning himself a wellwisher of the pretender's.'1 Wemyss and Mather passed through Padua on 23 September.2 On 24 October Stosch wrote (presumably in retrospect) that 'Weyms and Mather' were returning to England having spent a few days in Rome, where (as Honet and Brun) they had been 'almost always in the company of Arthur and Murray [Jacobites].'3

At the age of sixty-six Admiral Mathews was made plenipotentiary to the King of Sardinia and the States of Italy, and he assumed command of the Mediterranean fleet. He was received at Court in Turin on 22 December 1743 and left on 1 January (Storia Patria, 7-1:146-7).

In December 1744 Mathias was in Turin, where the British resident, Villettes, who had known him since childhood, recommended him to Horace Mann in Florence: 'this young man has a place in one of our public offices; but as he has a particular genius and a strong Passion for painting, he is come over into Italy, with the leave of his Superiors, in order to perfect himself in that Art by the Abode of two or three years'.1 Also from Turin, the Sardinian foreign minister, the Marchese d'Ormea, recommended Mathias to Cardinal Albani in Rome.2 On 25 January Mann introduced him to John Clephane in Rome: 'he designs to fix some time in Rome to study painting & has been advised to put himself under Battoni as the best master'.3 In 1745 he had rooms on the Monte Giordano in Rome in the same house as Batoni (the only British subject recorded as residing with him),4 and at one stage he was the neighbour of the French landscape painter Joseph Vernet,5 from whom he commissioned seventeen paintings, nine for himself, the remainder for friends.6 Mathias later said that he had gone to Italy in 1745 and returned in 1748.7
Matson was in Florence on 17 March 1711 with Mr Gage,1 and in Rome with Thomas Huddlestone on 16 March 1712.2
Manager of the commercial concerns of Messrs Jackson & Rutherfurd (see George Jackson), Matthews was both scholar and merchant.1 In the summer of 1762 he travelled with Benjamin West though Lombardy and Venice, where Matthews left his job and stayed on 'employed by Mr [John] Udny in the Way of Virtu'.2 On 1 April 1767 'James Matthews, English, aged 47, a man of great commercial ability, who could write English, French and Italian, but who was naturally subject to attacks of hypochondria', was discovered in his room severely wounded and unlikely to live;3 this was possibly the same Matthews.

Maty was elected Worts travelling scholar (see Thomas Kerrich) in 1767. On 11 January 1768 Langlois wrote from Vienna to thank Horace Mann for his kindness to Maty.1 On 5 August 1768 Maty arrived in Milan, Alessandro Verri (who had met him in London) describing him as good-hearted but inclined to melancholy and with a particularly nervous disposition.2
Maude was introduced to Horace Mann in Florence by Joseph Yorke in The Hague in a letter dated 4 July 1764: 'a Gentleman of fortune in Cardiganshire, strongly recommended to me by the Duke of Newcastle, the Earl of Holderness, & my Lord President of Council'.1 He sat to Batoni in 1764 (Clark/Bowron 270; priv. coll.), James Martin meeting him in the artist's studio on 11 May 1764.2
The Captain Maule who travelled as governor to Simon Luttrell in 1733, was probably also the 'Maul' who arrived in Rome with a Mr Glanville and the 5th Duke of Hamilton in April 1729 (SP 85/16; Walton, 7, 21 Apr. 1729).
Maullin was apparently a print-dealer. On 15 March 1796 William Hamilton was explaining to the Neapolitan authorities that twenty-four of the prints belonging to the 'negoziante Inglese Mr Maullin' were commissioned by the Queen of Naples (ASN e 674).




The first student sent abroad from the Foulis Academy, in August 1758 Maxwell won first prize at the Accademia del Nudo in Rome with a drawing preserved in the Accademia di S.Luca.1 He was presumably the 'Illmo Sige Giacomo Maxwell' living in the same house as 'Alberto Milne Archito' [i.e. Robert Mylne] in 1758.2 He is said to have died in Rome.3


He had arrived in Rome with his sister Lady Anne Maxwell by 10 May 1727, and had left by 21 June (SP 85/16; Walton, 10 May, 21 Jun. 1727).
They had arrived by 29 December 1729, intending to spend four months; having lived there 'several months very much in the good graces of the Pretender's party', they were about to leave on 13 April (SP 85/16; Walton, 29 Dec. 1729, 13 Apr. 1730).
Included by Reynolds in his Parody of the School of Athens (NGI) painted in Rome in 1751, he was possibly William Maxwell of Falkland, fell. Trin. Dublin, or a s. of Lord Farnham; see O'Connor 1983, 11.


Appointed proctor and agent to the English Catholic Bishops, he arrived in Rome on 25 October 1706. John Bellings frequently saw him in Rome in 1711.1 Rawlinson called him 'a secular English Priest in Rome' who had 'the original draft' of the Pamphilj ceiling by Pietro da Cortona.2 He was later appointed preceptor to the 'Prince of Wales' [the Young Pretender] and enjoyed other appointments within the Jacobite court at Rome (Gillow).
Lord Maynard and his wife, the beautiful and notorious Nancy Parsons who had been mistress to the Dukes of Grafton and Dorset, had arrived in Naples from Rome by mid-December 1777,1 to the acute embarrasment of Anglo-Neapolitan society. He was twenty-six, she was past forty. Lady Maynard had already been in Naples in 1770 with the 3rd Duke of Dorset, and Lady Hamilton now refused to receive or present her, so that, as Mrs Frederick Hervey explained, Lady Maynard 'having faite la malade till she was tir'd, is crept out in humble style to Lord Tylney's where she distresses all the English that meet her', adding that while she had 'secur'd a resource for her old age' she had been 'better off as she was. A Mrs Parsons was ye delight of ye society she lived in, whilst that coveted by Lady Maynard flies from her'.2 Though Lord Maynard was himself presented, he wanted to fight Sir William Hamilton because of his wife's exclusion from court,3 and when Maynard approached the King informally (in the tennis court) on the question, he was 'refused plump'.4 In April 1778 Lord and Lady Maynard were in Rome;5 early in November they were in Florence and later that month they were expected in Rome.6 Lady Maynard was very fond of Thomas Banks's small daughter, Lavinia, whom she used to take out in her coach.7 In January 1779 they were again in Naples,8 where this time Lady Maynard enjoyed some popularity as the result of her husband having cured the young Prince of Marino with James's Powders; she also shared the friendship of Lady Santo Marco with the Queen.9 In January 1779 there had also been a rumour Lord Maynard had shot himself,10 but the Maynards remained in Naples. Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) visited them there in September,11 and they were still there in January 1780. By 29 April 1780 they had come to Rome from Florence.12 Ten years later in 1789 Lady Maynard took a house at Nice for nine years.13 In September 1793 Lord Boringdon saw her in Turin and remarked that she had 'made herself perfectly mistress of all the passes of the Alps'.14 In 1796 she was in Milan, quarrelling again with the British minister because he had never enquired after her when she was ill, but really, thought Lady Berwick, because he had refused to present her at Court.15


In May 1744 Horace Mann told Walpole that Maynard, 'the little knight you recommended to me has quarrelled with us all, and we don't so much as guess why'.1 Walpole later learned he was 'a warm jacobite' and assumed he had been 'disobliged politically'.2


The 'Mainwaring' who arrived in Rome 'to see the antiquities' in October 1727,1 was presumably the Arthur Maynwaring in Padua on 27 March the following year.2

Meade was in Rome in December 1763, following a course of antiquities under Colin Morison.1 He called on James Martin on the 26th.2 In March he travelled to Naples with Edward Southwell: they passed through Capua on 22 March and again on 10 April on their return to Rome.3


When Medley died at Savona in August 1747 in the sixth day of his illness, five gallons of rum were used 'for embalming [him]'; among his effects were 'marbles, paintings, etc., etc., the spoil and plunder of the perfidious Genoese, and above £10,000 at Gibraltar'.1 In 1721 Rawlinson saw the name Henry Medley inscribed at the entrance to the Catacombs in the church of S.Gennaro in Naples.2

In 1760 Medows, a young naval Captain, sailed in the Shannon from Gibraltar to Leghorn escorting the Betty Sally in which Benjamin West was sailing from Philadelphia. West and Medows became well acquainted and West's portrait of Medows (Thoresby Hall, Notts.) is inscribed: painted by Benj.West at Leghorn for the english consul Sir John Dick 1761.1 For Medows's later visit to Italy, see Henry, 10th Earl of Pembroke.

Meeke was elected Worts travelling scholar (see Thomas Kerrich) in 1780; four of his letters from Italy survive, written from Naples and received on 18 March and 16 April 1783 (RBF note).
[Also called Maggot, Marget, Meggit, Meggitt, Meggot]. Megit acquired one of the hotels in Florence run by Charles Hadfield and he continued to provide a favourite haunt for British travellers. Mrs Hadfield, who had briefly maintained her husband's hotels after his death, left Florence in June 1779 (see Charles Hadfield), which was presumably when Megit succeeded. 'We are in Carlo's [i.e. Charles Hadfield's] house', wrote Charles Parker from Florence on 2 December 1782, 'which is now kept by an Englishman who was servant to Lord Maynard - his name is Mr Maggot - a Civil obliging Man & keeps his house perfectly clean & comfortable. His name is the only thing I object to, and cannot bring myself instead of De Carlo to put da Maggetto upon my Cards for fear People should take me for a Grub.'1 Lord Grey de Wilton refered to the 'Hotel Carlo' kept by an Englishman of the name of 'Marget' in January 1785,2 and in October the 10th Earl of Pembroke told his son from Florence: 'Pray recommend Meggitt's hotel here to all the travellers you possibly can. Unjust prosecution ... besides it's being an excellent house, entitles him to the good offices of unprejudiced people'.3 Watkins in 1787 commended the hotel warmly as equal 'to any I have ever entered. We find everything served up in the English manner ... Meggit is not only a good innkeeper, but very moderate in his charges'.4Megit was also discriminating. In 1789 Arthur Young recounted how in Florence 'the great Meggot looked into our cabriolets to examine us before he would give an answer, pretending his [rooms] were bespoken; and then assured us, as we had no air that promised good plucking, that his were engaged'.5 It appears that the hotel diminished over the following years. In 1798 Mariana Starke recommended Megit's apartment in Florence in the 'Lung'-Arno in the small Palazzo Medici' as 'only fit for a small family, price about fifteen sequins a month'. She also recommended a 'Meggit', probably the same, in Florence for the (expensive) hire of good carriages, and 'Meggit' for wines, tea and 'English camomile flowers'.6 A Catharine Megit, born in Florence in 1786, was buried in Leghorn in 1804, and a John Megit, merchant and banker at Florence, was buried there in 1814.7
Meighan was an Irish tailor who lived on the Piazza di Spagna in Rome. By the 1770s he had acquired a reputation for 'serving the English well'; 'he knows all the lodgings. He is a man of credit & much esteem'd. He will have your room ready, & by knowing your name will have an order from the Government for your carriage & baggage to go directly to your lodgings'.1 Holroyd had a suit made in 1765 by 'an Irishman called Meighon, who has been three times consul [sic] ... he is a charming, wicked, honest, jolly, candid sort of fellow'.2 Sir Watkin Williams Wynn gave a concert in his house in January 17693 and that year William Drake mentioned staying at 'an Irish Taylor's House, wch was formerly known by ye name of ye Monte d'Oro'.4 His death was recorded by Father Thorpe in 1780.5



After he had finished negotiating with the French on behalf of the British settlers in Tobago, Melville travelled in Italy exploring military sites from antiquity and, Polybius in hand, he proposed a new route for Hannibal's march (DNB). In November 1775 he was daily expected in Florence, his travelling companion, Mr Ker, 'an East Indian Captain' having left him 'tracing out Annibal's passage over ye Alps'.1 In January 1776 he was in Naples.2
Lady Pomfret recorded him in Siena in the autumn of 1739, and at Florence in July 1740; he was probably travelling with Sir John Rawdon (Pomfret jnl.mss).

When Tabitha Mendes sat to Nathaniel Dance at Rome in May 1761 he described her as 'a young Lady about 4 feet & a half high, and in every respect, with regards to person, one of the ugliest figures I ever saw, but the qualifications of her mind are as amiable as her person is disagreeable.'1 She had set out from England in September 1760 with the Wynne family [i.e. the widow of Richard Wynne, d. 1751, with her three daughters] and they had reached Venice by November.2 By February 1761 she had arrived in Rome, recommended by Thomas Robinson (later 2nd Lord Grantham) in Venice to the Abbé Grant.3 The fact that she was so ugly and looked like a Jewess caused James Adam much discomfort: 'I was ashamed of my countrywoman to such a degree that coming out [of Cheroffini's] I rubbed her over on abbe Grant'.4 Patch painted her in Florence in 1761 with the Duke of Roxburghe (priv. coll.) and both appear in his Punch Party (Chatsworth). She left Turin '3 or 4 days before' 9 September 1761 for London.5
By November 1762 Menzies had been to Constantinople with the Hon. Henry Grenville and had 'but lately' returned to Rome.1 He was in Italy with Alexander Moray, also from Perthshire and a nephew of Lord Eglinton. On 25 November 1762 they were given passports for Naples,2 where they stayed until April 1763. A portrait of Menzies (holding a copy of Ossian's Fingal) by Maron is dated 1763 (Busch-Reisinger Mus., Cambridge, Mass.). They then sailed for Marseilles in the same frigate as Sir James Gray.3
He was introduced to Horace Mann as as an 'amiable young man' from an 'ancient and considerable family in Scotland'.1 In Florence on 22 October 1768 he attended the dinner held to celebrate Mann's investiture with the Order of the Bath.2

Mercer's journal (Mercer jnl.mss) describes part of his tour in France and Italy with Thomas Caulet, Dennison, Mitford and Nesbitt. Their stay in Florence was enlivened by Mercer's flirtation with Maria Hadfield, and by their privileged reception from Horace Mann and Patch (presumably because Caulet was Patch's cousin, though Mercer makes no mention of this). They stayed at Hadfield's, where Mercer found Mrs Hadfield 'a very good kind of Old Lady' and her daughter, Maria [later Maria Cosway], 'an accomplished & agreeable Girl Mistress of Painting, Musick & Italian' (8 Nov.). When Maria left for Rome on 13 December, Mercer much regretted her departure. They dined with Patch and Mann on 11 November and 6 January, 'quite in a family way', and on 22 November they dined at Patch's country house 'about a mile outside Florence'. Mercer engaged the Abbé Pellori to teach him Italian (13 Nov.), and later procured a German singing master (10 Dec.). He observed the Pretender sleep through a whole performance at the opera (15 Nov.). In January, when there was a bitter freeze and much skating, Mercer 'appeared at disadvantage before the Duchess of Astrozzi, Sir Horace Mann' and others because of his bad skates (11 Jan. 1779). Mann gave them a letter of introduction to Lord Tylney in Naples (20 Jan.) and they left for Rome on 22 January. Mercer again met Maria Hadfield, taking her and Mrs Thomas Banks to the theatre (30 Jan.) and, reflecting on his own awkwardness, decided he was 'certainly in love' with Maria. But they spent only a few days in Rome before going on to Naples, where the diary ends abruptly on 17 February, with Mercer seeing much of Lord Tylney. On 10 May a Mr Benson, 'Melford' [Mitford] and 'Coutet' [Caulet] arrived in Venice (ASV is 760).
A Catholic convert, Meredith left England in 1688 and eventually settled in Rome, where he joined the Jesuits. He was without office, ill health preventing him from taking his final vows (Gillow). In September 1704 he was approached by a Father [James?] Forbes in an attempt to obtain a private audience with the Pope for George and John Brudenell (but nothing further is heard about it).1 He was doubtless the 'Mr Meredith an English gentleman who came here severall yeares ago to retire from the world' whom John Bellings met in Naples in April 1711.2 On 6 December 1712 he wrote to Basil Kennett from Naples regretting the 'seeming coldness' which Kennett had encountered from the English College at Rome.3 His will, preserved in the English College, is dated 1715.
In Italy with his wife and daughter, Meredith passed through Capua on 6 June 1772; three days later he was noticed at Terracina.1 They arrived in Venice on 20 July ('Williames Meredyth con sua moglie e figli').2 Patrick Home listed Mr, Mrs and Miss Meredith among those whom he had met in Italy c.1772-3.3



With 'elegant and airy Manners' and a radical disposition, Merry spent some seven years in Florence, writing occasional verses and enjoying the favours of the Countess Cowper. He had previously led a dissipated life in the British army before going abroad in 1780. On 20 March he was presented at the Court in Turin1 and by the spring of 1781 he had settled in Florence;2 in December 1783 he said he had already lived there for three years.3 In 1782 he published an Ode on Lord Rodney's defeat of the French in the West Indies and in the following year he published his Arno Miscellany, a poetical anthology 'printed for the amusement of [the contributors'] friends', to which the aging Allan Ramsay, then staying in Florence, somewhat surprisingly agreed to contribute: according to his son, Ramsay 'kept up a poetical correspondence' with Merry.4 In June 1785 Merry met Mrs Piozzi who introduced him to those kindred spirits Bertie Greatheed and William Parsons, all of whom were staying in Megit's hotel. Together they contributed to The Florence Miscellany, another verse anthology published that year, see Hester Piozzi. When Merry was threatened with arrest by Megit (the cause unknown) the group moved to another hotel.5 Merry achieved further notoriety through his affair with the young Countess Cowper (see Hannah Gore). In May 1784 Thomas Brand had observed his 'old pupil Merry' acting as her Cicisbeo, 'but I think she keeps him at a great distance as if he were her Maitre d'Hotel or Primo Gentiluomo di Camera',7 but by November 1784 their affair was generally known.8 That year Merry had sat to H.D. Hamilton, Sir James Hall seeing the portrait in the artist's studio on 12 November.6 Merry returned to England in the spring of 1787. He continued to write verse, adopting the pseudonym 'Della Crusca' as an acknowledgment of his sympathy for the Florentine poets whose Accademia della Crusca had been suppressed in 1783. Merry's political support of the French Revolution then made it expedient for him to travel to America, where he died in 1798.


The William Metcalf described by Stosch as having left Rome by 1 December 1722 after being in close liaison with the Jacobites,1 was probably the 'gentleman commoner of Trinity College, Oxford,' met by Rawlinson in Florence on 20 and 23 December 1721, 'lately come here from Venice in his way to Rome'.
At Easter 1767 Mr and Mrs Metcalf were staying in the Corso at Rome,1 and Lucas Pepys confirmed that they had been at Rome several months when he met them there in December 1767.2 On 19 August 1768 Margaret Forbes wrote that Mr and Mrs Metcalf, who had just gone to Albano, had lived in Rome 'almost two years'.3 The Metcalfs were again listed in Rome at Easter 1769.1 A 'Mr. Mote Alfe con moglie ed una figlia' arrived in Venice on 2 May 1768.4

The Mr Metcalf noticed in Rome in January 1780 by Thomas Jones (at the same time as Edward Pratt, Thomas Martyn and Mr and Mrs Petty),1 was presumably also the 'Metcalfe' mentioned by Pratt to John Soane as having been their mutual friend in Rome in February-March.2
Philip Metcalfe sat to Batoni in Rome c.1766-7 (Clark/Bowron 306; NPG), but nothing else is known of an Italian visit at this time.'Medcalf' met Dr Parkinson and Jonas Brooke in Florence in December 1783,1 and in 1784, when Brooke was in Rome (January and February-May), Metcalfe wrote to him offering knowledgeable advice on patronage in Rome: he should buy prints from [Ludovico] Mirri, 'a very obliging fair dealing man' and should look at the work of English artists - Hewetson, Gavin Hamilton and Tresham, Jacob More's Elements, Durno's Alexander, and Marchant's intaglios.2 Presumably it was the same Metcalfe who was in Naples in May 1783 (but see also Dr Metcalf).3








Mick [or Meek], a ship's surgeon, was one of several physicians attending the Duke of Gloucester at Florence in October 1771; the Duke had 'the greatest confidence' in him (Wal.Corr. 23: 337, 342, 393).

In 1731 Lord Middlesex, a lively and sensitive young man, went to Italy accompanied by a tutor-companion whom he had met at Oxford, Joseph Spence. Spence, the classicist and antiquary, described their travels in a series of notebooks and letters, which also convey a cheerful relationship with his pupil.1 From January to May 1731 they were in Dijon and they reached Italy in October. Coming by boat to Venice along the Brenta (15 Nov. 1731) with Lord Robert Montagu and Sewallis Shirley on a perfect day 'we ate and drank with a particular good appetite and were all merry as fiddlers'. They heard Faustina sing in Venice, where they had stayed 'just by' the best opera house. It was probably on this first visit to Venice that Middlesex sat to Rosalba Carriera (two pastels at Knole); he wrote her an undated letter (in French) revealing that she was acting as a go-between in an affaire.2 Though they were to spend three months in Rome, their most eventful time was the nine months in Florence, from July 1732 to April 1733. Within three weeks of their arrival Middlesex was Master of a Masonic Lodge; in 1733 he appeared on a medal struck by Natter as Magister Florentiae. The Lodge soon boasted some sixty members, not only British tourists but intellectual residents, including Dr Cocchi and Baron Stosch.3 Middlesex also discovered his passion for the Italian opera; he met Vaneschi, the improvvisatore (and freemason), whom he later asked to England as a librettist. Less seriously, Middlesex commissioned Italian verses describing Spence ('un fido Sanco ed un buon Asinello') and Spence wrote of Middlesex ('Free was his soul; and warm'd with generous fire: / Bold to engage; and prudent to retire'). Lord Middlesex returned to Italy in 1736. He appears to have spent most of his time in Florence and Venice. He was in Florence on 17 December 1736.4 During the Carnival in March 1737 he staged a masque, with Lord Barrington and Lord Raymond, in which he played a Roman consul returning on horseback to a Triumph5 ('le tout réussissoit fort bien et a fait parler toute l'Italie').6 In this production, and in an opera the same three produced at Lucca, Vaneschi (see above) cheated them, according to Horace Mann.5 Knapton's portrait of Middlesex in the Dilettanti, painted in London in 1741, shows him as a Roman consul and is inscribed Florentiae in festis saturnalitis anno 1738, and another portrait by Ferdinand Richter at Knole also shows Middlesex as a Roman consul. In May 1737 Middlesex arrived in Venice from Florence with William Ponsonby and Denys Wright.7 He was back in Florence by August, when he witnessed the death in a drunken brawl of Wright ('homme de peu de reputation, depuis long tems en Italie et depuis un an toujours avec Lord Middlesex')8 and composed a 'celebrated' elegy, Arno's Vale, on the passing of the House of Medici.9 In April 1738 he was seen in Turin.10 On 5 July 1738 with Lord Raymond he arrived in Florence from Venice,11 and he finally left Florence for England on 26 November 1738.12 In January 1739 a waiter in Piacenza asked Crisp 'if we had met Lord Middlesex in our Road, with 3 Italian ladies whom he is conducting to England for his own private use';13 it is also possible that these were three singers, for Middlesex was to spend great sums on his return promoting the Italian opera in London.14In 1743 Walpole described the Dilettanti to Mann as 'a club, for which the nominal qualification is having been in Italy and the real one, being drunk: the two chiefs are Lord Middlesex and Sir Francis Dashwood, who were seldom sober the whole time they were in Italy'.15
In May 1768 Middleton and his wife had arrived from America in London where their son was born soon after. They then travelled in southern Europe, spending some time in Rome, before returning to South Carolina in September 1771 (DAB). He was possibly the 'Mons. Midlton' in Venice on 16 July 1769 (ASV is 759).

In poor health and after a long and public controversy with the Master of Trinity, Middleton went off to Italy. In his Letter from Rome [1729] (concerning pagan beliefs and ceremonies within the Catholic church) he described his route to Italy through Lyons, Turin, Genoa and Florence. He had arrived in Rome by 20 November 1723; on 24 March 1724 he had left for Naples, and on 22 April he left Rome to return home with Coulson Fellowes and Colonel Folliott.1 They were in Padua on 13 May.2Middleton may have been the 'Mitilto Inclese eretici' living in the Strada Paolina in Rome in 1724.3 He was said to have lived rather grandly in Rome to demonstrate his academic importance and he also bought 'antique curiosities'.4 These antiquities, Middleton explained to Horace Walpole, were not collected 'out of any regard to their beauty or sculpture, but as containing what the Italians call some erudition in them'.5 Walpole bought his collection in 1744. Middleton's medallion portrait was made by Giovanni Pozzo at Rome in 1724 (BM). It has been said he went to Italy with Lord Coleraine, who arrived in Rome a month before him; they were there at the same time and both collected antiquities, but Middleton left Rome six months before Coleraine.
At Naples in January 1791 he was staying at the same hotel as Lord Mornington who called him '[Warren] Hastings's Middleton' and expressed relief that the size of the hotel was sufficient to prevent them from meeting (HMC Fortescue, 2:10).
Lord Midleton was conceivably the 'Carlo Milord de Mileton' staying in Venice from 10 February to 10 March 1750.1 'Lord Middelton' called on Edward Thomas with Lord Pulteney in Florence in August 1750.2 He was probably the 'Lord Middleton' who appears with several Irishmen in a caricature group by P.L. Ghezzi (Philadelphia MA), and the Lord Middleton who was to have played the part of Patriotism in Lord Charlemont's masque at Rome in March 1751. In May 1751 Sir Thomas Kennedy's accounts refer to 'Seeing Places with Ld. Midleton', and in 1752 Pancrazi dedicated a plate in his Antichità Siciliane to George, Lord Viscount Midleton.

Possibly also the 'Milbench' listed in Florence with Methuen on 22 June 1769 (Gazz.Tosc.).
Mr Milbank - son to Sir Ralph Milbank' was noticed in Italy by Patrick Home c.1772-3,1 either John or his older brother, Ralph (1747-1825), later 6th Bt.


Mildmay described his travels in Italy in a long letter written from Naples on 20 November 1730.1 He was accompanied by his 'good friend and relation Mr Wycke'. They sailed from Toulon to Genoa and thence to Leghorn, where 'there are computed to be about 43 English families at present & our language is as frequently heard in the streets & coffee houses, as the Italian itself'. They came through Pisa and Lucca to Florence, where, apart from remarking that in the Venus de Medici 'Art had produced what nature never yet has, a woman without faults', Mildmay described the last of the Medici Grand Dukes, Giovanni Gastone, passing his time in 'perpetual drunkenness, that vice rendering him incapable of executing Himself any other, his pleasure is to see others do it, particularly tis said that he takes great delight in seeing the sin of Sodomy acted before his eyes'. Spending only a day in Rome, they came to Naples where they evidently spent several weeks, to judge by the sights Mildmay describes (frequently with quotations from Virgil). His letter ends as they were about to return to Rome. On 14 December they called on Stosch in Rome,2 and on 22 December Mildmay wrote to the Earl of Westmoreland from Rome, describing how the Pretender and his Irish adherents were very 'diligent in intrudeing themselves into the company of all travellers' by offering to lend them the English newspapers; Mildmay said he intended leaving in a few days for Venice.3

In June 1753 Augustus Hervey met in Leghorn 'one Millar, who is in the Custom House here, who I saw play the harp, harpsichord, and flute all at the same time'.1 He was possibly the Mr Millar in Siena in December 1763, in whose house James Martin attended a concert.2

Mr and Mrs Miller travelled in Italy in 1770-1, and Mrs Miller described their journey in a series of letters addressed to her mother, Mrs Riggs, who was looking after their children in France. Mrs Miller published her letters in 1776 (Miller, Letters) and, although Mrs Delany wrote they were 'very conceited, they say, and not worth buying', they convey the character of an indefatigable, slightly absurd, but tolerant tourist. She was among the earliest British travellers to display any sort of sympathy for the Italian lower classes, though such judgment tends to be overlooked among her idiosyncracies. At Pompeii she climbs up a ladder to peer into a newly-excavated villa, but falls head first through the wall, and at Rome she marches round wearing a home-made pasteboard hat to protect her from the sun. She records details of dress and decoration and minutely describes the meals they were given at inns along the way. There are many asterisks in her printed text, concealing people's names and, for example, the identity of the pictures her husband bought in Parma. Foreign quotations are frequent, nearly always, as Horace Walpole observed, misspelt. In Bologna the Contessa Orsi presented them with a pheasant with a bouquet of carnations tied to its leg with rose-coloured ribbon, and Madama Aldrovandi sent her a curled and beribboned lapdog 'upon a magnificent velvet cushion, trimmed with gold fringe', which Mrs Miller declined so as not to disturb her own dog. The Millers' introductions included one to the Cardinal Legate, who caused a great stir at their inn when he arrived to call on them with 'his little body of 30 light horse'. They passed a night in a vast, disused hunting lodge at Radicofani, the walls green with damp, the huge table 'in a state of progression towards petrification', the sheets wet and prickly, and the blanket so dirty that 'I shall', Mrs Miller wrote, 'by means of an enormous pair of tongs, endeavour to drag it into as corner of the room, as far as possible from the bed'. On their first brief stay in Rome they were entertained by Cardinal de Bernis and at the house of the Duchess of Bracciano and the Princess Palestrina. Mrs Miller had two encounters with the Young Pretender who 'upon the whole', she wrote, 'had a melancholic, mortified appearance'. After spending two months in Naples they returned to Rome for Holy Week. At the Easter Day Mass Mrs Miller declined to kneel at the elevation of the host: 'I turned myself towards the Pontiff, and caught his eye, but he did not look sour at me, and seemed only to notice the singularity of my standing up; nor was I reprimanded after'. They resisted the social life, confining themselves 'to give a supper twice a week, Tuesdays and Fridays, and to ask the English principally'. Returning to Bologna they made the acquaintance of Farinelli, who was living in his retirment in a ferme ornée outside the city. In Venice the Millers rented sumptuous apartments in the Palazzo Contarini, which included an outer saloon 120 feet long. They attended a concert at the girls' foundling hospital and Mrs Miller was allowed behind the grille which separated the performers from the audience, but the sight of 'a dozen or fourteen beldams ugly and old; one blowing a French horn, another sweating at the bass viol, another playing first fiddle, and beating time with her foot in the greatest rage; others performing on bassoons, hautboys, and clarionets ... with several young girls who formed the choir, and one who played upon the organ', apparently deprived her of all taste for the music. The Millers eventually returned to England, 'her head turned with France and bouts-rimés; his with virtu', wrote Walpole.1 Mrs Miller went on to found a literary society at Bath Easton, her guests placing their poems in an antique urn the Millers had bought in Frascati, and the best three entrants were crowned with wreaths of myrtle.
He is recorded making copies in the Uffizi between July 1773 and July 1787; his nationality is not clear (Borroni 1987, 99-100, 106, 110, 116-17, 133, 135-6, 138, 143, 147, 154-5).



On 9 October 1773 Joseph Miller won a prize for sculpture, 2nd class, at the Accademia del Disegno.1 Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) listed in Rome in September 1779 a 'Miller at Capo di Casa/Sculptor',2 and a 'Monsu Miller' was living in the parish of S.Lorenzo in Lucina in 1779 ('seguita il Vicolo del Carciofolo').3
Between 1772 and 1774 'Millar' copied several pictures in Rome for Lord Arundell at Wardour Castle. A van Dyck Martyrdom of Maccabeus was sent off by Father Thorpe in August 1772; portraits of Lord Howard and Bishop Arundell in June 1773, the portrait of a lady in March 1774, and a water-colour from Gudio Reni's Presentation of the Virgin.1 In June 1773 the Dowager Duchess of Beaufort visited 'Miller, a young English Painter' in Rome. In 1773-4 and 1776-7 Miller was living in the Via Babuino, from 1776-7 sharing an apartment with Robert Home2 (Thomas Jones moved into the same rooms in December 1777 on their departure). In December 1776 Jones went to Frascati and Albano with Miller and Home.3 On 13 December 1777 Banks told Humphry that Miller had left Rome for Venice, where he intended to stay some time.4 It is possible that he returned to Rome, as Jones met 'Millar' there in a party of British artists in January 1779.5 Miller was back in London in 1780 when he exhibited at the SA.
A 'Miller' recurs in Pacetti's diaries between 13 March 1797 and 31 March 1803, apparently a dealer in antiquities (Pacetti giornale, 13 Mar. 1797; 3 Aug. 1798; 8 Mar. 1800; 31 Mar. 1803).




There were two Millikens in Italy in 1761-3: Thomas, travelling with Samuel Kendrick, and James, who died in Venice early in 1763. On 17 May 1761 'Dutton, Hilican et Carmichael' passed through Capua on 17 May 1761,1 of whom 'Hilican' was doubtless a Milliken, and probably James. Both Millikens were presented to the Duchess of Savoy at Turin sometime between July and December 1761 (see Carmichael), and the following year they appear to have been in Florence together. James described the fire in the Uffizi on 12 August 1762 in a letter of 5 December: only the painted ceiling of the gallery was destroyed, and the head keeper, Bianchi, 'to whose imprudence and negligence the whole accident is ascribed, is turned out of his place, but the Emperor [of Austria] generously allows him a small pension of 3 sequins a month for life'.2 On 9 May Rouet wrote from Rome of 'poor young Milliken's death in Venice of a fever ... he bid as fair for long life as anybody I ever saw last Novr. at Florence'.3 He was buried in the Protestant cemetery on the Lido (his age given as twenty one).4



Probably 'Mills the Architect' whom Richard Dalton described to Lord Bute in a letter from Rome of 3 March 1759 as 'really very clever and designs with skill' (Hayward List, 28).

Milman was elected a Radcliffe travelling fellow (see John Monro) in 1771 and was in Italy in 1772, when he met the Duke of Gloucester in Rome (DNB). William Young (1749-1815) met him in Naples the same year (Young notebk. mss).

He attended the dinner given by Lord Holderness in Venice in February 1745 in honour of the Society of Dilettanti.1 He was still in Venice when his father died on 29 November (CP).
In very poor health, Lord Milsington arrived in Rome with his wife and sister on 1 March 1729; he was then seriously ill and wished to go straight on to Naples. They had set out by the 14th, but Milsington died at Piperno on the way (SP 85/16; Walton, 3, 14, 24, 31 Mar. 1729).

Mr and Mrs 'Minifie' were noticed in Florence in March and April 1784.1 In February 1785 they were one of three English families at Pisa who 'never Play, and give Coffee and Ice'; the Rev. William Gunn also recorded that 'Lady Astley ow'd much to the Friendship of Mrs Minnifie last Summer [1784 in Rome], under whose Protection she was plac'd by Sir H. Mann'.2

A Jacobite who, with Charles Wogan, Richard Gaydon and Luke O'Toole, brought the Princess Clementina Sobieska from Innsbruck to Italy in April 1719 - a service for which he was made a Knight of Rome.1 It was said his imitation of the Pretender's rather pompous young chargé d'affaires, James Murray, greatly amused the Princess.2 In November 1719 he travelled with Forbes of Pitsligo and Wogan from Leghorn to Genoa, where he took ship to Spain. Lady Misset had attended Clementina on her flight and was specially dear to her, but she was dismissed by the Pretender as her influence grew unduly.
Mitchel was one of Thomas Jones's companions in Rome in May 1778 and October-December 1779. In September 1780 Jones, then in Naples, heard from William Pars that Mitchel had died in Rome of a putrid fever caught in visiting hospitals. He left no papers, but Jones thought he was a Scot; he had been 'brought up to Physick and spoke both French and Italian though with an unhappy delivery ... There was generally a Gloom hanging over him, supposed to arise from the Narrowness of his Circumstances, which however soon dispersed over a Flask of Florence and a pipe of Tobacco' (Jones Memoirs, 71, 91, 92, 98).

Mitchell travelled on the Continent for several years, a rich but lonely man, following the deaths of his father, sister, wife and infant daughter. In April 1732 he set out from Paris for Italy, where he spent two and a half years, principally in Rome.1 There, between November 17332 and June 1734 he frequently saw Martin Folkes, and they were often accompanied by the mathematician Celsius Stevens, with whom Mitchell finally left Rome on 12 September 1734. At Parma on their return journey he witnessed the end of the fighting between the Austrians and the French. Mitchell's diligent travel journals,3 from which his itinerary has been taken, combine careful observation with general reflections - on religious painting in Italy, for example: 'one cannot help regretting (after seeing the vast profusion of paintings in these churches, by the ablest masters), the bestowing so much industry and art upon so silly subjects as the life and actions of one enthusiast and the fabulous martyrdom of a bigot. Corporeal and ridiculous representation of the Deity serve to corrupt and debauch our ideas of him'.4
Mitchell' was in Capua on 4 December, presumably on his way to Naples.1 In January 1754 he was presented at Court in Naples with Mr Stevens [Thomas Steavens?].2 'Michell' met Cardinal Albani in Rome through an introduction from Horace Mann which was acknowledged on 2 February.3 A 'Giorgio Michel' exported from Rome a mosaic picture and two pieces of carrara marble on 12 June 1754.4


In March 1733 'a Scotsman called Mitchell' had been in Florence with Clark and Trumbel [or Turnbull]; they all wished to enter the Pretender's service. They had gone on to Rome and in May went to Bologna for the opera. In August 1733 Mitchell had returned to Rome with 'an equipage and seems to wish to establish himself in Rome'.1
Mitford kept a careful notebook of his Italian journey which provides his itinerary and a number of high-flown judgments, particularly on architecture (Mitford jnls.mss). The modern buildings in Turin lacked any 'particle of grace to palliate the absurdity of the main design ... They do not surprise; they only disgust'. In the Duomo at Milan it was impossible to view the ornamentation without 'a species of indignation'. Florence he thought 'a small & not very elegant city', and in Rome the design of St Peter's was 'too simple, & the ornaments too complicated' - only under the dome 'all criticism is lost in admiration'. After the 'detestable filth' of Naples, he even found Siena 'ugly'.Prompted by the Correggios in the Balbi Palace in Genoa, of which several versions were known, he considered the question of authenticity: 'the possessors of almost all are so sanguine in their confidence of possessing originals, that either this master frequenty repeated this design, or many a connoisseur hugs himself in the idea of possessing a treasure he has not. But the idea makes him happy; & if happiness is the lot of man, it matters not what is its foundation'. In the Vatican he had an original thought: 'Michael Angelo seems to have been the William Pitt of painting'; the Last Judgment 'like the actions of the celebrated politician, is a tissue of unconnected greatnesses'.

Moir set out in 1792 to travel overland from London to Italy accompanied by Richard Bertram, a merchant of Civitavecchia, both to assist his older brother Patrick Moir and to study as a painter.1 He was listed at his brother's address (James Byres's former house in the Strada Paolina) in 1795.2 John Moir was making drawings in Rome for Sir William Forbes in April-May 1793 and in July James Byres wrote to Patrick Moir saying that if John 'continues to improve as he has done since with you, he will soon be a great Artist, but you must be as atentive to his health, as to his studies preventing his being too sedentarey'.3 He was presumably the 'Pittore inglese Mr Moir' who was given permission to draw in the environs of Naples in March 1797.4 Christopher Norton told his brother-in-law Patrick Moir that John had 'made good use of his time ... that he can go on with his studies anywhere without difficulty, though I think Rome the properest place for a young artist, and also to dispose of his works, especially under your care and recommendation'.5 By 1806, however, Byres was expressing to Patrick Moir 'the deepest concern' to see the distressed situation to which he has reduced his poor wife and family'.6
Patrick Moir succeeded to his uncle James Byres's business in Rome as cicerone and dealer in 1790, when he had already worked with him, along with Christopher Norton, for five years. He was probably the 'Monsieur Patrizj Ptte.' listed as staying with Byres in 1787-8 and he was clearly the 'Patrizio Mour' at the same address as Byres in 1790 and on his own in 1792-6 (the records are incomplete).1 In May 1791 Hewetson recorded that Moir had 'had no employment at the commencement of the Winter, but of late has had his hands quite full and is likely to succeed'.2 He guided Sir William Forbes through Rome in April-May 1793; Forbes had had to wait for Moir to complete courses with the Dowager Viscountess Spencer and Sir John and Lady Throckmorton, and at the end, he wrote, 'we took a kind & friendly leave of Moir, who had been most useful & attentive ... and for whom I entertain a real regard on his own account as well as on that of his witty uncle Mr Byres'.3 Byres had agreed with Moir that he should retain 10% of all the profits he made in Rome, but in 1793 Byres commented that these 'were greately too smal', and proceeded to advise him on charges, saying he had sometimes received £50 or £100 per person; parties should comprise 'five or not more than seven', and select travellers should be entertained with 'a Hansom Breakfast, Dinner or Supper'.4 Byres also advised him 'to push your Banking Business as far as you conveniently can'.5 In 1793 Forbes had employed him in this capacity, and in 1796 he was acting as banking agent for the Academy to pay William Artaud's pension in Italy.6 In 1800 certain monies from England were transfered through him to Cardinal York.7On 19 April 1797 Byres wrote to him suggesting he could stand in for him if he wished to visit home,8 and Lady Knight, who 'liked him well', confirmed Moir's departure from Rome in May 17979 (bearing a letter from Artaud6). Exports by Moir of works of art from Rome to England are listed in 1790-2, 1794, 1796, and 1802-4,10 and Moir finally left Rome in 1805.11

Mr Thomas Mol, Irish Capt. of a Regiment of Tyrolese', had arrived in Rome from Bologna by 1 February 1727 (SP 85/16; Walton, 1 Feb. 1727).
On 26 January 1714 William Kent wrote that 'Mr Envoy from florence Coll Molesworth [John Molesworth] and 'his brother Mr Pye [Bysse?]' were in Rome.1 'Colonel Molesworth', a 'brother of Envoy Molesworth', travelled with George Berkeley from Genoa to Paris in the summer of 1714.2 Bysse Molesworth acted as his brother's secretary at Turin in 1722.3

Molesworth was appointed British envoy extraordinary to Genoa in 1710 but did not take up the appointment, choosing instead the same post in Tuscany.1 He arrived in Florence on 14 March 1711, having passed through Padua on 8 February with John Eckersall, his secretary,2 and Venice.3 He spent three years in Florence, during which he experienced some financial difficulties,4 but he was able to develop his interests in the fine arts. He made the acquaintance of the architect Alessandro Galilei whom he later induced to visit England and Ireland in 1714. Molesworth also met his father's close friend, the 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury, who visited him in Florence on his way to Naples in 1711,5 and corresponded with him until his death two years later.6 Molesworth's last dispatch from Florence was dated 3 April 1714, and his only recorded absence from the city was on a visit to Rome in December-January 1713/14. Kent recorded his presence there on 3 December with Lord Dalkeith and again on 26 January with his brother (see Bysse Molesworth).7 Molesworth returned to Italy, this time to Turin, in 1720. In December 1721 he was described as 'the delight of this whole court',8 and to distinguish him from other British envoys he was known as 'the virtuoso'.9 Molesworth appears to have lived up to his reputation. He advised Lord Macclesfield on the purchase of statues and arranged for marble to be sent to Sir Thomas Hewett. There was much correspondence with Galilei, then in Florence, who appears to have acted as Molesworth's agent in the purchase of works of art: a piece of sculpture involving a figure of Ganymede from Antonio Montauti, a casket or dressing case from 'Rossi', and pictures from Tommaso Redi.10 In 1722 Galilei was negotiating for a painting by 'Palma' and in 1723 for pictures which he suspected were Giordanos.11 Molesworth again encouraged Galilei to return to Britain and Ireland, and once sought his advice on Florentine fresco painters on behalf of a Turinese nobleman.12 Because of ill health, Molesworth retired to Pisa in October 1722 and stayed until August 1723. He finally left Turin in May 1725 and returned to London. A lost portrait of Molesworth by Rosalba Carriera was copied in 1744 by Anthony Lee (priv. coll.).
Molesworth and a Mr Batin passed through Milan 'without making themselves known' early in November 1777.1 Molesworth appears to have gone straight to Rome, where Thomas Banks noticed him in December 1777.2 Thomas Jones saw him there in April 1778,3 but on 17 May Molesworth and 'Battiny' had arrived in Venice.4 They then returned to Rome, Swinburne mentioning 'Molesworths' in July.5 Molesworth was in Naples that winter, his name and address, 'alle Crocelle' being inscribed on the verso of a Soane drawing made for the Bishop of Derry,6 and he was with Soane at Pompeii on 22 January 1779. In April 1779 Jones sent Molesworth a View of Veletri through Jenkins in Rome.7


John Molyneux, in Padua on 29 February 1708,1 was presumably the Mr Mullineux, an English gentleman in Rome in December 1707.2
Pooley Molyneux was in Padua on 10 June 1720,1 and 'Molyneux' sat to Rosalba Carriera in Venice on 7 October 1720.2

Henry Monck and his wife, Lady Elizabeth, spent some four years in Italy, but accounts of their visit are disjointed. Lady Elizabeth, a great beauty,1 clearly spent much time with her sister, the 'frolicsome Irish widow', Lady Anne Hatton.In July and August 1790 the Moncks were in Florence,2 where the British envoy, John, Lord Hervey, although much occupied with Lady Anne Hatton, was also attentive to Lady Elizabeth.3 In December 1791 they were listed in Rome,4 and they were in Naples in January 1792, when Lady Anne, making a set at Prince Augustus, was staying with them. They were in Naples for the winter of 1792-3,5 and in May 1793 they were in Rome living grandly in the Palazzo Farnese in apartments 'usually occupied by the Ambassador of his Sicilian Majesty', Lady Elizabeth being 'a great favourite of the Queen of Naples'.6 On 21 May they witnessed Lord Bruce's wedding at La Quercia. They presumably spent the winter of 1793-4 in Naples with Lady Anne, all three coming from Naples to Venice in June 1794.7
Monck sat to Angelica Kauffman in 1763 (Christie's, 19 June 1970) and to Batoni in 1764 (Clark/Bowron 271; Geffrye Museum), both portraits being painted in Rome. He was presumably the 'Mr Monk' with whom James Martin dined in Rome on 13 May 1764 (Martin jnl.mss).




He was among those noticed by Lord Gardenstone in Naples in March 1788, who 'by their sense and manners do credit to themselves and honour to their country'.1 On 17 February 1789 James Irvine described having met 'Monro' in Bologna perhaps the same.2
Monro was elected Radcliffe Travelling Fellow of Oxford University in 1741.1 The fellowship could be held for ten years and entailed the obligation of studying medicine on the Continent. He spent the winter of 1745-6 in Rome, displaying Jacobite leanings in the company of Richard Phelps, Rowland Holt and John Bouverie. He also visited Naples and Herculaneum.2 In May 1747 Holt and Monro came to Florence from Rome and were said to be returning to England. 'I should think', wrote Horace Mann, 'some notice would be taken of them, as their behaviour at Rome has been so publicly insolent'.3 Monro impressed James Russel in Rome as a person 'of excellent good qualities, a great virtuoso in painting, antiquity, curiosities, &c.'4 It was perhaps significant that in the second volume of his Letters Russel dedicated to Monro his plate of the urn containing the heart of the Princess Clementina Sobieska in the Church of SS.Apostoli.

Monson and Sackville Tufton were in Venice for the Carnival in January 1715.1 William Kent noticed Tufton in Rome on 16 April, and 'Manson' on 20 July.2 Monson and Tufton were in Padua on 30 December 1715.3
John Monson was travelling with his cousin, Lewis Thomas Watson (the son of Lord Sondes). Dr John Moore saw them in Geneva in 1772 and, while they seemed to him to be 'naturally of a good character', yet they 'literally do nothing - the first from a fit of obstinacy, will not so much as speak French. Their time is spent in the most Insipid and absurd manner Imaginable, sauntering and gaming'.1 They were first noticed in Italy in March 1774 when they attended a dinner given by Horace Mann in Florence2 and they arrived in Venice on 11 May.3 On both occasions J.B. Durade was with them, suggesting he was their tutor (Durade, a French print dealer, had previously accompanied Robert Grimston). On 23 July, on the death of his father in England, Monson succeeded to his Barony. On 2 August he was with Watson in Vienna, dining with Sir Robert Keith.4 By December they were back in Italy at Rome, where Monson sat to Batoni for a full-length portrait dated 1774 (Clark/Bowron 375; priv. coll.). Henry Peirse, Monson's future brother-in-law, was also in Rome,5 and the three went together with Lord George Cavendish to Naples, arriving by 10 January 1775.6 By March Monson and Cavendish, with Lord Tylney, had lost above two thousand pounds at cards, mostly to the King of Naples.7 It is possible that the 'Durell' and 'Manzen' reported in Florence on 18 March 1775 were Monson and J.B. Durade; 'Preis, Crorsbie, Walson, cavalieri Inglese' were in Florence on 3 June 1775.8

Edward Wortley Montagu had travelled as a young man on the Continent, and he appears to have been twice in Italy. On his earlier visit he was part of the time with Joseph Addison. In July 1700 Addison wrote to him from France, expecting him 'or a Letter from You with some Impatience'. They were together with George Dashwood in Padua in January 1701.1 On 13 August 1701 Montagu was in Geneva visiting the Duke of Shrewsbury, with Lord Holderness and Sir Thomas Alston, all described as 'lately come from Rome'.2 In December Addison was assuming he was back in England.3 He appears to have been the Mr Montagu with his governor recorded by the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome between 24 March and 18 June 1703.4 On 3 November 1703 'Mr Worstley-Montagu and Mr Mackay [John Macky] of Dover' arrived in Vienna and were 'shortly' to wait upon the Duke in Rome; Shrewsbury was also asked to tell Montagu (and a Mr Gaugain) 'of the commotions at Constantinople ... because of the acquaintance they have in those countries'.5 Shrewsbury records Montagu in Rome attending a 'collation' at the Jesuits' villa on 4 February 1704, and 'sealing' his pictures with Gaugin [Gaugain] on 15 April. Montagu had acquired two pictures by Chiari (Apollo and the Muses and King Midas) and some statues he had acquired were entrusted to the German ambassador in Rome.6 The Chiaris were retouched by the artist on 15 April 1705.3 He was presumably the Montagu with 'Monsu Cogne [Gaugain?] - Maggiordomo' living near the Trinita dei Monti in Rome at Easter 1704.7 Later in April 'Mr Montagu nephew to my Lord Halifax' was in Florence with Lord Quarendon,8 and they were in Venice for Ascension Day 1704, leaving towards the end of May 'for Vienna homewards'.9 For his last visit to Italy, see Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.
According to Horace Walpole, Montagu's mental parts were 'not proportionate', his characteristics ranging between linguistic brilliance and profligate squalor. He was several times in Italy. Soon after 1730, when he made his first marriage to a laundress, he was sent on a grand tour with his tutor John Anderson.1 In June 1740 his mother, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, then in Venice, found he had been in Venice and Florence in 'low company', running up debts.2 In January 1761, following the death of his father and as his mother prepared to return to England for the last time, he set out for Venice. His two boys were left in care in England but his eleven-year-old daughter and her 'governess', Miss Cast, accompanied him. He stopped first in Leiden, but he was in Turin by April 1762, studying Arabic and wearing a turban and a long beard. His daughter was already lodged with a priest at St Peter's, prior to taking the veil.3 He became involved in the controversy over an antique bust in Turin which bore Egyptian hieroglyphics, thought by John Needham to resemble Chinese ideographs, but Montagu would have none of it, and his scholarship attracted the admiration of Winckelmann in Rome.4 Montagu had reached Rome at least by July 1762, and he stayed until after October, placing his daughter in an Ursuline convent. In April 1763 he sailed from Leghorn for Alexandria, with Nathaniel Davison as his secretary-companion.5 He returned to Venice in September 1765 and became one of the sights of the city. 'His beard reached down to his breast, being of two years and a half growth, and the dress of his head was Armenian'.6 Montagu passed that winter in Pisa; he was later in Leghorn and in the autumn of 1766 he again sailed to Alexandria. He finally returned to Venice in July 1773 as a Mohamedan Turk. He continued to be a considerable attraction, his guests including the Duke of Gloucester. 'His beard', wrote Lady Mary Coke wrote in November, 'I am told, is a great length: he wears eastern dress, and sits with his legs across with a long pipe in his mouth'.7 In 1775 he sat to Romney (priv. coll.), artist and sitter discovering a mutual esteem,8 and M.W. Peters also painted him in oriental dress (priv. coll.). His final years were spent, as his mother's had been, between Venice and Pisa, and it was at Padua that he died on 29 April 1776.
Lord Montagu's father had directed that he should study at a German University (CP). In October 1789 in Switzerland, Lord Montagu announced his intention of wintering in Italy and he was expected in Florence on 29 November.1 In May 1790 he was staying in Venice with his tutor Mr Ross,2 and he was noticed in Padua that summer.3 He was drowned in Switzerland in October 1793 attempting to shoot the falls at Schaffhausen, only weeks after the family home, Cowdray House in Sussex, had been razed by fire.
The James Montagu in Padua on 6 July 1711,1 was presumably the Montagu seen in Turin in October 1711.2
Montagu arrived in Venice on 20 February 1767 with his tutor Jonathan Lipyeatt.1 They were in Naples in October 1767 about to go to Rome.2 'Mr Montagu, Ld. Beaulieu's Son' had returned from Italy by April 1768.3 He was possibly the Montagu reported in Florence on 11 April 1767 with a Mr Pastel.4
Lady Mary's first visit to Italy had been made in 1718, as she returned with her husband from Constantinople. They were briefly in Genoa and Turin in August-September 1718.1 Twenty years later she went alone to the Continent and she was to spend the next twenty-three years abroad, all but five in Italy. When Spence met her in Rome in February 1741 he called her 'all irregular and always wandering. She is the most wise, most imprudent; loveliest, disagreeablest; best natured, cruellest woman in the world'.2 When she set out for Italy in 1739, Lady Mary at first maintained that her husband was to follow her, but their marriage had long been a matter of indifference and they were never to meet again. Her daughter Mary had married the 3rd Earl of Bute and her wayward son was with a keeper in Holland (see Edward Wortley Montagu, 1713-76). Apart from her own restlessness, the immediate inducements for going abroad were her friendship with the young Francesco Algarotti, the Venetian intellectual who had been in London, and the example of Lady Pomfret who had recently gone to Italy with her family. Her husband gave her an allowance of £245 a quarter and she had a small income from her father's bequest.She arrived in Venice in September 1739. She met friends there, as the Abbé Conti and Pietro Grimani (formerly Ambassador in London), and was made much of. In May 1740 she watched a great regatta from Grimani's palace seated next to the Prince of Saxony, and there was a steady stream of young British travellers. But Algarotti did not come, and in August 1740 she went to Florence to stay with Lady Pomfret in the Palazzo Ridolfi. In the Uffizi she met Lady Walpole (later Countess of Orford, who was then leading a markedly independent existence in Italy); 'only figure the coalition of prudery, debauchery, sentiment, history, Greek, Latin, French, Italian, and metaphysics', commented the young Horace Walpole, then in Florence on his grand tour. Her lively stay in Florence contrasted with the four weeks she next spent in Rome: 'I go to bed every night at ten, run about all the morning among the antiquities, and walk every evening in a different beautiful villa', she told Lady Pomfret. She went on to Naples for six weeks, a 'gay flourishing city', then returned to Rome to lead a more gregarious existence than before, mixing with the many British travellers, notably Lord Lincoln and Joseph Spence. Then she heard her considerable baggage had arrived from England and she went to Leghorn to collect it. Restless, she sailed to Genoa and went on to Turin, where at last she met Algarotti, now a Prussian Count. They spent two months together which were not idyllic, and when Algarotti was recalled to Prussia in May 1741 it seemed the end of their affair. Lady Mary returned to Genoa, still uncertain where to settle; she rented a pleasant house by the sea and was treated respectfully by the nobility. The approach of Spanish troops (during the War of the Austrian Succession) late in September then led her to resume her wanderings; passing through Turin she went to Switzerland, settling first in Geneva, then in Chambery. In May 1742 she settled for six years in Avignon.'Jacobites, priests and gamesters' eventually made France intolerable, and in August 1746 she returned to Italy, accompanied by the Count Ugolino Palazzi, an impoverished young nobleman from Brescia, whom she had previously met in Venice. Their journey to Brescia was enlivened by encounters with both the Spanish and Austrian armies, but within five days of their arrival Lady Mary fell seriously ill, and was confined for two months. They had travelled at her expense and Palazzi, who was unscrupulous, was to exploit Lady Mary over the next ten years with his stories and promissory notes. Her jewellery disappeared in November and many of her possessions were 'lost' in transit from Avignon the following April. She paid for new furnishings for his house, and generally displayed an abnormal tolerance. She first rented and then bought the Count's country house in Gottolengo (some eighteen miles south of Brescia) and by March 1747, recovered from her illness, she began to enjoy an easy retirement. 'I am entirely given up to rural amusements', she told her daughter in 1747, 'and have forgot there are any such things as wits or fine ladies in the world'. She occasionally received visits from fashionable groups and once accommodated a theatre troupe. In Brescia she discovered a flourishing Academy of Natural Sciences and she probably maintained an apartment there. To overcome her loneliness she wrote romantic tales of the Court of Louis XIV, imaginary letters to Marguerite de Navarre, lyrical verses and fables which she sent to Algarotti, but above all she wrote letters, principally to her daughter Lady Bute.On her doctors advice, in July 1747 she had taken the water cure at Lovere (forty-five miles from Brescia, on the northern edge of the Lago d'Iseo). She considered Lovere to be a place full of 'all the delightful ideas of romance'. Unlike Gottolengo, it was a lively town, with concerts, gaming and opera, although Lady Mary was content to drink the mineral water and sail on the lake in the evening. She returned there in the summers of 1749 and 1750 (when she also stayed in Salo a month in 1750), 1751, and in 1754 when she bought a run-down palace there and stayed through the following year. In 1756 there was a final rupture with Palazzi, whose extortionate schemes had obtained from her some £2,500. Lady Mary became ashamed of her ill-judged alliance, and when she arrived in Venice in September 1756, John Murray, the English minister, wrote that she had been 'for some years past, and still continues, in the hands of a Brescian Count, who it is said plunders her of all her riches'.Lady Mary was sixty-seven when she moved to Venice and Padua. As her biographer Robert Halsband has expressed it, Venice was her London and Padua her Twickenham: social pleasure and studious retirement. In Padua she had a modest house on the outskirts of the city where she served home-made bread and butter to her guests. In Venice she leased a small house with a garden; her friends included John Murray, the resident, Lady Wentworth, his wife, and Joseph Smith who was married to Murray's sister. Her friendship revived with Algarotti, then in Bologna with a villa at Mirabella near Padua, but it had become literary and distanced. The Venetian habit of masking suited her age. Then after eight months in Venice Lady Mary suddenly changed her mind concerning Murray (who was insufficiently attentive to her, it appears), and contracted a new friendship with the Jacobite Sir James Steuart who arrived in Venice in May 1758. Murray, of course, could not receive him, but Lady Mary was effusive towards Steuart and his family. In November 1760 Thomas Robinson (later Lord Grantham) described her in Venice as 'very old, very healthy, chearfull & clever, but scurrilous to the highest degree ... The great number of anecdotes she possesses whether true or false, make her very entertaining'.3 Her husband died in January 1761, leaving her £1,200 a year, and she went properly into mourning. Then in April 1761 she determined to return to England, and she set out in September, 'dragging my ragged remnant of life to England'. She had arrived by mid-January 1762, and died in London on 21 August. The first edition of her Letters was published in an underhand way in May 1763, and was promptly acclaimed.
Mary was placed in an Ursuline convent in Rome by her father, Edward Wortley Montagu, in 1762.1 In October 1764 James Martin visited her in the convent. He thought she was 'about fourteen years of age' and from the few words she spoke 'she seemed to me to have almost forgot the English language'.2 Robert Grimston saw her ('a daughter of Wortley Montagues') admitted into a convent in Rome in 1768 (meaning, she took the veil),3 as corroborated by Father Thorpe.4 Lady Betty Mackenzie saw her in December 1777: 'a beautiful Nun at Rome, a neice of Lady Bute, Therese Marquerite Montague; she is charming', she wrote; 'she is upon a high footing & much esteemed',5 and Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) visited her in September 1779.6 In 1791 Father Thorpe wrote that the ample fortune left her by her father and brother (sic) 'enabled her in great part to support this Monastery'.7

Lord Robert Montagu met Lord Middlesex in Milan in November 17311 and they were travelling together from Padua2 to Venice on 15 November. They spent the Carnival in Venice, leaving for Rome early in March.3 Montagu presumably accompanied Lord Middlesex to Rome. On 11 July 1732 they arrived together in Florence,4 where Montagu became a member of the Masonic Lodge which Lord Middlesex founded,5 see Charles, Earl of Middlesex.



As commander of the Mercury he was in Leghorn in 1789, when his father was trying to meet him. In February 1794, when Montgomery was commander of the Inconstant, Lady Webster dined with him in Florence (Holland Jnl., 1:117. Pembroke Papers, 1:497-8).
From Florence, between February and July 1753 'Mr Montgomery' was sending his compliments to Ralph Howard through James Tyrrell.1 He may have been the Irish officer on half-pay who left Florence on 10 March 1753 for Bologna with Lieutenant Charles Lee.2 A Montgomery brought an introduction from Horace Mann to Cardinal Albani in Rome in March 1754,3 and in June 1754 a Montgomery provoked Elizabeth Pitt, though no-one, as Mann explained, knew why.4
Montolieu was introduced to Horace Mann in Florence by Arthur Villettes in January 1742, and was going on to Rome.1 His portrait by Benefial (Christie's, 29 Oct. 1954) is dated 1742.

A Jacobite who used the aliases of Lord Brigenton or Lord Lesley, he was described by Brinley Skinner as 'a middle sized rather short man, well set, somewhat thick in body & more in his legs, a fair hansome & fresh colour'd Complexion, about 45 or 50, black cloths, & a short wig, has a strutting starch gate seemingly haughty, & I fancy a Scotchman'.1 He had come from France to Pisa in 1728 with an Irish Dominican called Donaught, and had gone on to Bologna 'to serve the Pretender as Minister of State'.2 He came from Bologna to Leghorn in September 1728, and was then said to be going to Genoa and Spain with Jacobite dispatches.1
One William Moody an Irish Man is arrived [in Florence] from Dublin in his way to Rome, & keeps mighty private' (SP 98/34, Florence Newsletter, 9 Dec. 1733).
Mr Moon Miniature painter' arrived in Rome in September 1764 and he left in 1767 with Robert Crone.1 In May 1765 in Rome Sir William Farington met a Mr Moon, probably the painter, and together they called on the Abbé Stonor.2
Mr Moor & 2 sons we saw at Pisa passed here [Rome] without seeing anybody & are at Naples' (Pococke letters mss, f.7; 1 Apr. 1734).Lady Pomfret mentioned a Mr Moor in Siena between 24 August and 7 October; she saw him again in Florence on 8 and 15 July 1740.1 This was probably the Moor/More noted by Spence in Turin sometime between October 1739 and September 1740, and in Bologna in October 1740.2
Acheson Moore, who was in Padua on 21 March 1719,1 was probably the 'Mr Moore a son of ye late Bishop of Ely's' [John Moore] who was reported in Venice with George Parker (later 2nd Earl of Macclesfield) in December 1719.2





Moore, from Sumerhill, near Dublin, accumulated a great collection of copies 'painted by Albano, and others', during a residence of 'several years' in Rome; he became devoted to the House of Stuart, 'whose interests he not only maintained in conversation, but supported by his purse' (T. Campbell, Philosophical Survey of the South of Ireland, [1778], 33-4).

Moray entered the Academy at Turin on 6 November 1759.1 His health was not robust and at times 'his vivacity exceeded the strength of his Constitution' but, wrote James Stuart Mackenzie, 'He is mighty good temper'd'. He did not fence 'lest it be too violent for his Breast', but was studying music, French, riding and dancing; he dreaded going back to Nice and having a governor (which he knew would happen if his health grew worse).2 By May 1761 Moray was in Genoa planning to leave by the 6th,3 and later that month he was in Pisa, seeking a cure for the 'complaint in his breast'.4 In 1762 he sat to Batoni in Rome (priv. coll.; Clark/Bowron 260 as James Moray), where he was with Archibald Menzies. On 25 November they were given passports for Naples5 and on the 27th the Abbé Grant wrote that there were in Rome 'two gentlemen from Perthshire [one] the nephew to the Earl of Eglinton and son to Moray of Abercarny'.6 Together they sailed from Naples to Marseilles in April 1763.7 Moray, probably the same, paid Angelica Kauffman in Rome for a portrait of the Abbé Grant (SNPG) in 1763.8

In May 1707 it was reported that 'Lord Peterburrow and Capt. Mordant his Son was there [Genoa] and as soon as the latter is recovered of his wound which he rec'd upon this coast they will both come to England'.1 In March Mordaunt had commanded a small squadron bringing his father from Spain to Italy which had been attacked by French ships.2
With Richard Bagot, he accompanied the Countess of Northampton on her melancholy journey from Rome to Naples in May 1763,1 see Charles, 7th Earl of Northampton. In September 1763 Mordaunt was in Geneva.2
The high reputation Jacob More achieved as a landscape painter during his twenty-year residence in Rome surpassed that of any other British painter then working in Italy.1 He was hailed as the English Claude and Joshua Reynolds considered him 'the best painter of air since Claude'. Despite his fame, More appears to have remained rather aloof. He was perhaps a little proud; he once took offence at a caricature which Grignion made of him at Rome, but since he had 'placed his [own] whole-length in the gallery at Florence, where Raphael is contented with barely showing his sublime countenance',2 his fellow artists were not surprised. That More was able to act for some ten years as the Roman agent for the intemperate Bishop-Earl of Bristol suggests he was also patient. (It is conceivable that he was the Mr Moore, a young artist, to whose advances the unhappily-married Mrs Patrick Home succumbed in 1775/6, see Patrick Home).More is first recorded in Rome at Easter 1773 living over the English Coffee House in the Piazza di Spagna, in the studio which Richard Wilson had used twenty years before. He retained this address until 1787;3 in 1790 he was living nearby in the Strada Rosella (Rome List 1790). Among his earliest Roman works to be noticed were a 'burning of Troy' and a 'universal deluge', mentioned by Father Thorpe in March 1774,4 and More sent off four landscapes for exhibition in London at the SA in 1775. In 1776 he was contemplating 'a large picture', of a view near the Ponte Molle, 'A Morning' scene. In 1777 he interrupted his studio activity to accompany the aging Allan Ramsay as draughtsman in his quest for the definitive site in the Licenza valley of Horace's Sabine Villa; many of the sketches More then made are now in the NGS.5 In 1779 More received his first commissions from the 4th Earl of Bristol (as the Bishop of Derry had just become) for two 'Views in the Neighbourhood of Rome', and in 1780 he completed for the same patron the large Cicero's Villa (Ickworth). He was eventually to execute at least twenty paintings for Lord Bristol.In September 1778 More had travelled post to Naples with the young architects R.B. Brettingham, John Henderson and Thomas Hardwick, to see Vesuvius erupting. Thomas Jones, who was already at Naples, said More visited the volcano at night and made a series of drawings of the mountain. In the next four days the party went to Pompeii and sailed round the Bay of Baiae; they returned by moonlight from Pozzuoli, an excursion during which, said Thomas Jones, 'we were amused with More's flying Sketches as he call'd them - for tho' none of the Company waited a moment for him, he contrived to keep up ... & brought back a dozen Views & these were to pass as portraits of the respective scenes'.6 By 1780 Vesuvius erupting had become one of More's most dramatic and successful subjects, together with moonlit scenes. His repertory also came to include views based on the great waterfalls at Terni and Tivoli (the 2nd Earl Spencer commissioned in Italy a spectacular pair, Tivoli - Sunset and Terni - Moonlight, now untraced). More was then a busy artist. In March 1780 Canova noticed and admired many paintings in his studio, including 'one representing Vesuvius as described by Pliny' (almost certainly the Eruption of Vesuvius now SNG),7 and a year later James Irvine asserted that More 'is become one of the first landscape painters that ever lived'.8 In 1781 he was unanimously elected to the Accademia di S.Luca and in 1784 his self-portrait was requested for the Uffizi. He presented it in person in March, not the modest half-length which most artists offered, but a full-length figure seated before the Grotto of Neptune at Tivoli. In January 1785 More was advising one of his patrons he would have to wait two years for his picture 'owing to Work I have in hands',9 and in March Lord Grey de Wilton observed that More 'is reckoned the best landscape painter in Rome and called the English Claude'.10 His work was frequently reviewed, with superlative praise, in the Roman art journals Memorie per le belle arti and Giornale delle belle Arti. Goethe admired a Deluge which he saw in More's studio in July 1787.11 In August 1785 More completed a large landscape Apollo and Daphne for the Stanza di Apollo e Dafne in the Villa Borghese (it was removed in 1891; untraced), which the Prince was ambitiously redecorating. At the same time the Prince asked More to create an English garden within the Borghese gardens. This scheme occupied More from 1785 to 1788 and comprised a lake surrounded by trees 'in groups in a Picturesque manner', an island and a temple. More's plans and correspondence demonstrate the novelty of the picturesque in Italy and the surprise it created at Rome. Much of the work, including the lake, survives today.12 Having achieved eminence as a landscape painter by the mid-1780s, it appears that More thereafter concentrated less on his painting as his activities diversified. His letterbook for the years 1786-7 (More letters mss) contains, besides an account of commissions for his own pictures, advice to his patrons (including Sir George Beaumont) on the theory and practice of landscape painting, while his own work was tending to become repetitive and hastily-executed. The letters also indicate that he was spending an increasing amount of time not only with Prince Borghese, but as a dealer in works of art and as an agent to Lord Bristol13 and his British artists in Rome. In January 1787 he wrote that he had sold 'the greatest part' of his 'old pictures' to Lord Breadalbane and he described trying to acquire paintings by Maratti, Parmigianino and Correggio. He was sometimes accused of deception: 'like others who have engaged in picture dealing' he attempted to impose a Michaelangelo on Prince Augustus, 'but Flaxman & others convinced the Prince that it was not a work of that master'.14 More's calm temperament perhaps helped him in his commercial undertakings: in March 1791 the sculptor Hewetson at Rome described how 'two parties' had divided 'what business has been done this year', but 'Exceptions to what I have just said are Hugh [H.D.] Hamilton & More the landskip painter, who belong to no party, yet have had their share of business'.15 More died unexpectedly in Rome on 1 October 1793, 'of a bilious fever', only weeks before a planned move back to Britain. He had just completed a Panorama of Rome (untraced) commissioned in Rome by Prince Augustus, which was exhibited at Buckingham House a few months later.16 He was buried in the Protestant cemetery in Rome and his executors were Thomas Jenkins, Sir James Wright and Richard Cooper (c.1740-1814).17 A sale including several old master paintings from his collection (some called Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Perugino, Tintoretto, Veronese and Claude) was held in 1796 (Christie's 26-27 Feb.). See Jacob More, his nephew.
Following the sudden death in Rome in October 1793 of his uncle, the painter Jacob More, he travelled to Italy later that year. According to one of the artist's patrons, Sir George Beaumont, the nephew was bequeathed 'the bulk of' his uncle's property and took charge of clearing up his affairs.1 A letter from More in Rome to Sir William Hamilton in Naples is dated 22 February 1794.2 The following month More was introduced by Guy Head to his uncle's colleague Vincenzo Pacetti, from whom he ordered a headstone for his uncle's grave; it remains in situ.3 On 7 March 1794 he was granted a licence to export from Rome his uncle's paintings with some old masters (mostly school pieces or copies).4


According to Horace Mann, she 'got into great estate that belonged to a Mr Hunt who died in her company at Paris'. On 2 July 1748 he described her coming to Florence, where some 'ill-natured people have whispered her story, and I wish it does not make an éclat' (Wal. Corr., 19:477, 489).
Towards the end of 1763, after he had received his MD from Edinburgh University, John Morgan of Philadelphia set out with an American colleague, Samuel Powel, on a tour of France, Switzerland and Italy. It lasted ten months, of which his journal (Morgan Jnl.) covers the last four in some detail. His correspondence reveals that he had come to Italy from France, and that he travelled via Genoa, Leghorn, Pisa and Florence to Rome. In the last three places he found himself in the suite of the Duke of York, which brought access to 'all the grand entertainments'. They had travelled from Rome to Naples and back with Martens, son of the Danish consul at Venice (see Mrs Conrad Martens); a 'Morgan' had passed through Capua on 25 April on his way to Rome.1 They were back in Rome by 21 May, when they embarked on a course of antiquities under James Byres with their compatriots, John Apthorp and Thomas Palmer.2 On 8 June Morgan, with Powel, James Martin and a Mr Hayes, had a private audience with the Pope,3 whom he found 'affable and courteous'. Morgan was received into the 'Belles Lettres Society of Rome' and he sat to Angelica Kauffman (NPG Washington), who in 1766 sent him her Self-portrait (untraced) in payment for his medical advice.4 His journal opens on 6 July, the day he and Powel left Rome.In Bologna they admired Guido Reni's SS Peter and Paul, which Benjamin West was then stealthily copying, and Morgan heard Laura Bassi lecture on 'Light and Colours and Electricity'. Morgan always attended to his scientific interests: in Parma he visited the hospital and the faculty of medicine at the University, meeting the physician Flaminio Torrigiani, and in Padua he discussed medicine with Morgagni, professor of anatomy (whose eight daughters had all entered convents). In Venice they were attended by the British representatives John Murray and Joseph Smith, but in Turin Morgan's desire to see the fortifications led to an incident with Louis Dutens, who was 'of more difficult access than any English Minister we had seen in Italy'. When they had established their worth, however, Dutens treated them respectfully, introducing them to the King of Sardinia and the Royal family, as well as to Mme de St Gilles. But 'being urgent to return to London' they resisted an invitation to a concert given by Lord Mountstuart 'at w'ch all the fine Ladies of Turin are to be present'. It is evident that Morgan and Powel were determined travellers; when disrespectfully treated by customs at Buffalora, twenty miles from Milan, they returned to Milan and successfully obtained redress, and their coachmen said that their spirited behaviour led to their receiving 'good rooms and deferential treatment'. Morgan's journal concluded with a list of 'Articles Collected by Dr Morgan during his travels', which were shipped from Venice to England; they included ten paintings (one by Albani, the only artist named) and a number of prints after Roman, Bolognese and Venetian masters.
He was travelling in Italy with Thomas Lewis and La Roche (probably their tutor). They twice visited the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome, on 12 December 1701 and 20 January 1702,1 and were in Padua on 19 April 1702.2


Mr Morice, Clerk of the Green Cloth, and of vast wealth',1 set out for Italy on 8 July 1760. His health was poor and he intended to seek a cure in Naples. He had been in Florence by 20 October,1 and was apparently in Naples by November.2 In March 1761 he had gone to pass a few weeks in Rome to see the Holy Week ceremonies (Cardinal Albani acknowledged Morice's introduction from Horace Mann on 4 April 17614), but he was to return to Naples 'to pass the summer at a villa he has hired near Portici'.3 He was suffering from gout in Naples in August.5 The following year he arrived in Rome late in March 1762,6 and on 1 April he paid Batoni for his Venus and Cupid (Met. Mus., New York; Clark/Bowron 235). He also sat to Batoni for a whole-length portrait dated 1762, showing him reclining in a landscape (priv. coll.), of which there is a replica (Sir Brinsley Ford), as well as a reduced bust-length version (Hartford, Wadsworth Ath.; see Clark/Bowron 241-3). Meanwhile from Naples, Sir James Gray, the British envoy, was forwarding mail to Florence,7 where Morice was about to arrive on 13 April.8 He was in Turin by 19 May and left on the 24th, intending to spend the summer in France.9 Morice continued in delicate health and he next returned to Naples in the winter of 1768-9. Writing from Rome in November 1768, he told Lady Mary Coke that it was necessary for him to spend the winter in a warm climate and that he was going to Naples.10 William Hamilton reported his presence there on 17 January 1769.11 The following April he wrote to Hamilton from Rome, thanking him for all the civilities received at Naples the previous winter; 'if you stay there much longer', he wrote, 'it is very probable I shall return to thank you in person as I can truely say scarce any other air agrees with me & every time I go there I like the place better & better'.12 'Noris' was in Florence later that month on his way home, and was presumably the 'Mons Morij' who left Venice on 18 May (he was then in Venice at the same time as Charles Anderson Pelham, who had previously been in Venice with a 'Mons. Moris' on 3 May 1768).13Morice returned to Naples several times in his final years. He was there 'almost the whole winter' of 1779-80, laid up with gout, and on 20 May 1780 he was in Florence on his way home.14 He was setting out 'immediately' for Naples at the end of July 1782.15 In September 1783 he was in Lausanne leaving for Naples,16 and in a letter of 10 October Mann described meeting him in Florence 'with a pair of crutches, which at first shocked me, till I observed by the manner of his using them, stretching them out a good deal before his feet, that they were more calculated to prevent him from falling upon his nose than to support his body'.17 Mann also said Morice was going on to Naples through Rome, and he may be identified as the 'Milord Morice' in Rome from 11 to 18 October (and a 'Cav. Morris' was in Rome with 'Milord Fuilhna' on 22 November).18 Dr Parkinson saw him in Naples in January 1784,19 and he appears to have stayed in Italy until his death in Naples in October 1785. He was in Ischia in July 1784,20 and Lord Grey de Wilton dined with a Mr Morris in Naples on 23 February 1785.21 He was probably also the Mr Morris whom Lady Elizabeth Foster met at Portici in May 1785.22Morice had an important picture collection, which Horace Walpole saw in London in 1781; after his death it was bought by the 2nd Earl of Ashburnham, who kept only six, including two Salvator Rosas, a landscape by Nicolas Poussin, and a Mola.23
Morice's visit to Italy in 1729-30 was made remarkable by his patronage of Venetian artists. He and 'Colonel Paget' [Captain Piaget] had arrived in Rome by 14 July 1729 and by 4 August Morice was talking with Jacobites, which was, said Stosch, largely Piaget's fault.1 They spent some weeks in Naples and had returned to Rome before October, when they were about to leave for Florence.2 Morice was expected in Venice in November, by which time, said Joseph Smith, he had 'bought all Swiny's monumental pieces, and was a fortunate hitt for him'.3 Smith was refering to those Allegorical Tomb paintings commissioned by Owen Swiney which had not been bought by the 2nd Duke of Richmond, see Swiney. Morice also bought two Canalettos (Christie's, 4 Jul. 1986) from Swiney, who mentioned them in a letter of 27 September 1730.4 Morice was still in Venice on 20 January 1730, intending to stay to the end of the Carnival with a group of English travellers (who included the 2nd Earl Cowper, George Lyttelton, Charles Wyndham, Lord Boyne and Edward Walpole),5 and it must have been at this time that he sat to Rosalba Carriera for the portrait dated 1730 at Pencarrow.6 Morice was in Padua with Captain 'P. Piaget' on 6 March 1730.7 On 24 August 1729 'Il Cav. Moris', possibly Morice, had sent from Leghorn two scagliola pictures, some vases and sculpture, a copy from Guido Reni, books and prints.8
Morin arrived in Naples on foot on 13 May, 'about the age of 30 years, in a ragged Coffee colour'd Coat of English Cloth' and stayed at the sign of the Three Kings; 'two days after ... he bought the compleat dress of an Abbé, and on the 17th went to Puzzole [Pozzuoli] ... and was brought home by the Patrole very drunk about two o'clock in the morning, when after drinking another bottle of wine he shut himself in his room and was found next day in a chair expiring ... the man declared himself to be English, born at London and his name Morin; ... no papers were found about him, but sewed in the lining of his under waistcoat were two Purses containing Four hundred and Seventy Guineas. One hundred and Seven Half Guineas. twenty Roman Zechines. Six Venetian Zechines One Louis d'Or two pieces of Six Ducats Neapolitan money' (SP 93/21; Hamilton, 21 May 1765).
Morison lived in Rome over fifty years and he became, with James Byres, James Clark and Thomas Jenkins, an outstanding cicerone. Like them, he had first gone to Italy as a young artist but, becoming absorbed by antiquity, turned increasingly to the business of virtù. He was distinguished for his learning; Lumisden described him as 'my learned, accurate and ingenious friend',1 and the Abbé Grant called him 'an excellent Scholar [who] has all the classicks almost by heart'.2 For Winckelmann he was a spirited, strong and healthy man, a former pupil of the classical scholar Blackwall in Edinburgh.3 Boswell, who also hinted that he might be a little moody, described him as 'an honest Aberdeenshire man' with 'such a prodigious quantity of body that it would require at least two souls to animate it'.4 Morison had gone to Rome as a promising young artist in 1754, under the patronage of Lord Deskford (later 6th Earl of Findlater) who also furnished him with letters of introduction.5 He became the pupil of Mengs, telling his patron in September 1755 of the 'necessity of a long study at no small expence'; he was following Mengs's directions and had 'resolved to make a tollerable proficiency in Designing 'ere I begin to Colour'.6 A 'Monsu Moreson' was living in the Strada Felice in 1757, but in 1758 Morison was living in Mengs's house in the Strada Vittoria with James Nevay and Richard Brompton.7 Little is known of Morison the artist, but in 1760-1 he did some work for James Grant of Castle Grant, Lord Deskford's nephew, who was in Rome early in 1760. In July Morison was copying Grant's portrait by Gavin Hamilton - probably also the 'beautiful picture' he was copying for Grant in August - and in October he was about to send Grant a 'drawing of the composition he had projected' (this was probably the Andromache, Morison's only known painting, formerly at Cullen House, see James Grant).8 In 1775 Patrick Home paid him for a copy of Raphael's School of Athens, in which Cesi had painted some parts of the architecture (see Home). At some stage Morison injured his eyesight through a shooting accident while hunting, which led him to abandon painting for sculpture,5 and it was as a sculptor that he wrote to Sir James Grant (as he had become) in April 1778, saying that his love of his profession had overcome 'every inducement' to be an Antiquary, and that 'for several years past I have applied with more assiduity than perhaps I ever did when younger'; a marble group 'the property of Mr Stuart a son of Ld. Bute', was to be shown at the RA ('the dying mother preventing her child from sucking the blood of her wounded breast vide Plini Epist.'; RA 1778) and he had 'several other pieces in hand for Gentlemen I have had the pleasure of seeing here'.9 In March 1778 Robert Mylne said he had lately received 'an odd letter from Morrison at Rome from which and his turning sculptor, I should suspect he is cracked in the head piece'.10 Morison sent one of his own (unidentified) marble groups back to England in 1786,11 and in 1790 Byres had in Rome a terracotta portrait by Morison of one C. Congleton.12Morison was evidently more gifted as an antiquarian. By September 1758 he had met Winckelmann who, impressed with his knowledge of Homer, proposed they should go together to Calabria that year - but the visit did not take place.13 In 1762 Morison was engaged for the year by 'Mr Hope' [either Charles or Olivier],14 and the following year he considered being a cicerone. 'As both Venuti and [James] Russel are gone to eternity', wrote the Abbé Grant, 'our Friend Morison is determined to commence the ensuing November [1763] Antiquarian. He has been much counselled to undertake that business. He is much qualified to do it.'15 At the same time Robert Strange told Lumisden that Morison had been warmly recommended to him as an antiquary - 'which I find he intends making his profession', and he went on to say that he thought Morison 'better qualified than Byres' but was reluctant to pass judgment, for it would 'only breed bad blood'16 (and at this time, 1762-5, Byres and Morison were sharing the same address in the Strada Vittoria).17 Lumisden was to comment in June 1764 that Byres 'seems hitherto to have had the greatest engagement',18 but there was apparently little professional jealousy. As William Drake (1747-95) later explained, Morison was 'a good classical scholar, which induced us to give him the preference to another of the same country, who has likewise merit, tho' his forte lies in a different way'.19 According to the Abbé Grant, writing in February 1764 Morison had been 'greatly employd being almost the sole Antiquarian general to the British Travellers of this winter'.20 In December 1763 he escorted Lord Ossory with Topham Beauclerk, and a Sir John Mead with Mackenzie of Seaforth (later Lord Fortrose), the latter being the first 'he ever waited on'.21 By June 1765 Morison was 'thriving mightily'.22 There are few accounts of a Morison tour in Rome. Richard Colt Hoare in 1786 recorded that 'although I devoted four hours every morning to this most interesting and edifying pursuit' his course with Morison had lasted five weeks.23 In March 1765 Morison had given James Boswell a six-day Course in Antiquities during which, moved by what he saw, Boswell 'began to speak Latin. Mr Morison replied. He laughed a bit at the beginning. But we made a resolution to speak Latin continually during this course of antiquities'. Boswell also found him 'ill-humoured' and 'quite sulky' on different days.4 A certain ungraciousness was also noticed in 1771 by the 7th Earl of Findlater (the son of his patron), who thought Morison's 'manner of acting unhandsome' when he had asked for £600 'as a Recompense for what he lost last Winter & for his absence from Rome'24 (as he had accompanied his charge in Europe and northern Italy). But these appear isolated notes within a general chorus of approval. Of his many later clients, Charles Burney in November 1770 reckoned Morison 'one of the first and most sagacious antiquaries in Rome.'25 Knowledge of antiquity and growing connoisseurship led inevitably to dealing. Morison, 'whose whole study it was to acquire a knowledge of art', told his nephew Pryse Gordon 'that it took him more than twenty years to be able to distinguish copies from originals'.26 In 1765 Gavin Hamilton was telling Lord Palmerston of the fine antiquities owned by Morison,27 and the following year both were acquiring pieces from the Barberini Palace, Morison's share including two Claudes.28 In 1769 Morison took from Hamilton a head of Venus, which had been destined for Lord Ossory, because it exactly fitted a marble figure he had acquired.29 In 1774 the Abbé Grant said that Morison had cleared £1,500 through his interest in excavations30 and in 1775 he was advising Patrick Home 0n acquisitions. In 1785 he was seeking a portrait of Cardinal Pole for the Archbishop of Canterbury.31 Between 1785 and 1803 payments to and from Morison for antique statuary appear in Vincenzo Pacetti's diaries, doubtless involving restoration,32 at which Morison himself was said to be adept.5 He exported works of art from Rome on fifteen occasions between 1765 and 1774, and five more times before 1802; the majority of the items were paintings, but there were also a number of antique marbles.33 Morison seems also to have acquired a private collection of paintings and drawings. In 1783 John Ramsay described his collection of drawings as 'one of the most choice I have seen',34 and Morison gave a large collection of 'castes in sulphur' and some 300 pictures, 'chiefly of cabinet size, of all the great Italian masters, from the invention of oil-painting down to the perfection of the art by Raphael' to King's College, Aberdeen. But they were all seized by the French on Morison's death and disappeared from view.5Morison spent most of his Italian years in Rome. From 1762 to 1798 his name appears in the registers of S.Lorenzo in Lucina ('Morison' with varying first names: 'Colino' [1762-6, 1790, 1797-8], 'Ercole' [1767-72] or 'Gavino' [1776- 96]), at the Strada Vittoria 1764-5 and thereafter near the Piazza di Spagna ('Volta Piazza di Spagna verso S.Sebastianello'). In 1771-3 the gem-engravers Anton and Johann Pichler were at the same address. In 1797-8 'Colino Morison an.70 scozzese' was listed at 'no.22 Seguita Piazza di Spagna verso S.Sebastianello', while at no 26 was 'Monseur Amitton Giacomo Inclese Pitte. an:80' [Gavin Hamilton].Few of Morison's movements outside Rome are recorded. In 1755 he had been to Naples (at the invitation of Charles Hope-Weir, with Robert Adam, Clérisseau and the Abbés Grant and Stonor).35 He made frequent visits to Florence,36 and was in northern Italy with Lord Findlater in 1771 (see James, Earl Findlater). He was possibly the 'Mr Morrison' by whom Nevay sent a letter to Edinburgh in September 1768.37 In May 1784 he certainly visited Scotland,38 where he once intended to purchase an estate at Rosieburn in Banffshire, 'but neither the climate not the mode of living suited his Italian habits', and after a few months he returned.5 In May 1789 Morison had 'abruptly' left Rome; 'I have reason to think', wrote the Abbé Waters, 'he is on a foolish errand & will return. I bought his English books'.39 But it appears Morison was never long away from Rome, where he died in 1810.5 His portrait painted by H.D. Hamilton 178340 remains untraced.


Lord Mornington went abroad for the sake of his health, travelling with his French mistress, Hyacinthe Gabrielle Roland, whom he subsequently married. He described his travels in four letters addressed to Lord Grenville.1 They crossed Mont Cenis on 12 October 1790 and made only brief stops on their way to Naples, where they stayed some six weeks. From Naples on 4 January Mornington wrote that he had been away from England 'near six months'. His letter made copious allusions to Virgil and Horace; 'all the old ideas of Eton and Oxford employed my mind', he wrote, without which 'I think the journey through Italy would lose the greatest part of its amusement'. At Naples he disagreed with that 'coxcomb Mr Addison' who had doubted the authenticity of Virgil's tomb, taking from it a cutting from the 'most sacred laureus' for Lord Grenville (15 Feb.). He returned to Rome, where Hyacinthe sat to Vigée Lebrun, the portrait dated 1791 (Christie's, 26 Jun. 1964). He witnessed a murder under his window, the murderer walking away 'very coolly to the house of Cardinal Albani where he was received with open arms'. Such colpi di coltello, added to the 'dirt, stink, & vermin', made him feel uncomfortable at Rome and in April he had contracted a malarial fever ('not at all of the same nature of that which obliged me to leave England'). He resolved to return to the cooler northern climate. He was still indisposed in Florence, where the British envoy, John, Lord Hervey, was particularly attentive to him, but the heat prevented him from visiting Venice. He went through Verona to the Tyrol and Germany and by 3 July he was in Spa, proposing to be back in England in August or September.

A very sensible equable young man',1 Lord Morpeth travelled in Italy with the Rev. Matthew Marsh and Lord Boringdon. For the earlier part of his tour, see John, 2nd Baron Boringdon. Morpeth stayed on in Rome after Boringdon and Lord Granville Leveson Gower had left. He was presented to the Pope, with Archibald Douglas, Charles Ballard and Marsh, on 7 April 1794,2 and he intended to leave for England soon after 9 May, his departure being particularly regretted by Lady Bessborough.3 He was probably the 'Wil Morlet Inglese Milord' in Venice on 30 May with 'Mr Mack'/'Mach' [presumably Marsh]4 and he had delivered a letter to Count Rumford in Verona by June.5

A regular soldier, commissioned in 1709, Bacon Morrice (sometimes written 'Morris') was governor of Languard Point Fort and was said to be a cousin of the Walpoles. When he came to Rome in November 1724 he was believed to be a Hanoverian spy, and even to be intent on assassinating the Pretender.1 Stosch reported his arrival on 25 November and on 2 December said his presence was causing 'consternation' in the Pretender's household. On 16 December the Jacobites had effectively cut him off from receiving his letters. On 30 December Stosch introduced 'Morris' and Captain Matthew Sewell to Cardinal Alberoni, and Morrice then talked freely on subjects 'dont on est fort jaloux a Rome'. Morrice meanwhile was trying to acquire some drawings from Stosch for Horatio Walpole (British ambassador in Paris). Sometime before 27 January 1725, the Pretender had encountered Morrice (who was armed) and Stosch in a narrow street (they were returning from Frascati, where Morrice had gone for his health); he was persuaded that Morrice was out to kill him and immediately persuaded the Pope to banish him. Morrice left for Florence, escorted by two armed guards furnished by Stosch.2 Rawlinson confirmed that Morrice had been ordered by the Pope 'to retire from his dominions within three days, the reason not given, but supposed to be reflections on the government and religion passed very indiscreetly in all public places'.3 From Florence the British resident, Francis Colman, reported Morrice's banishment,4 and he was instructed to make appropriate representations in Rome.

On his death in Rome on 15 March 1791, Charles Morris was described as a virtuoso who had lived for a long time 'on the Continent, particularly at Rome and Naples'.1 He was buried in Rome in the Protestant cemetery by the Rev. Wade. He had been the close friend of Antonio Cortese, secretary to the Neapolitan embassy in Rome, for more than fifteen years, and he once told Sir William Hamilton that when he was living at Sorrento in August 1779 he had been able to read at night by the light from an eruption of Vesuvius. He was, presumably, the Mr Morris whom Thomas Jones encountered in Naples in 1778 'an English gentleman of taste and erudition who has for some time resided here in a retired manner',2 and the erudite Mr Morris who in Rome read Tacitus with young John Ramsay and was the daily companion of his father Allan Ramsay in January-March 1783 and again in Forence in October. Morris left Florence for Rome on 29 October 1783 with Lord Fitzwilliam.3 Lady Elizabeth Foster was dining at Portici with a Mr Morris in June 1786.4 A 'Carlo Morris' had arrived in Venice on 11 May 1774.5
Giacomo Maris/Morris Americano' was travelling in the Venezia between January and March 1796 (ASV is 776, 777, 781, 783).
Little is known concerning Morris's visit to Italy in 1731-2. Between June 1731 and November 1732 he was reported to be 'absent from the Kingdom and beyond the seas' (DBA); he was said to have measured the bridge at Verona.1 He may have been travelling with Bubb Dodington; their names ('Doddington / Morris') occur together in a list of travellers Joseph Spence met in Florence between August 1732 and April 1733.2 Forty-nine drawings of the Veneto by Morris (Christie's, 21 Mar. 1989), some of which are dated 1744, suggest that Morris may have then been visiting northern Italy.3

Mrs Morris was 'about to arrive' in Leghorn on 22 October; she was in Naples in December, when Thomas Brand called her an old acquaintance (Brand letters mss e, 22 Oct., 10 Dec. 1791).

An intelligent young man and an enterprising traveller, Morritt left England with his tutor, the Rev. Percival Stockdale, in March 1794. It was only after travelling across Europe to Constantinople and Greece that they came to Italy, as Morritt described in a series of lively and learned letters to his family.1 They landed at Otranto in October 1795 from Corfu and went via Brindisi to Naples, which seemed to Morritt to have 'more of the air of London' than any place he had previously visited: the Neapolitans dressed like Englishmen and 'English porter and English cooking' were again available (18 Nov. 1795). Among his compatriots he found the 4th Earl of Bristol (8 Mar. 1796), Admiral William Hotham and Mrs Newnham (29 Dec. 1795, 8 Mar. 1796), and Emma Hamilton, to whom he devoted several enthusiastic pages of his letters (18 Dec. 1795, 14 Feb. 1796). As for the King, 'no one', he wrote, 'could be more amiable or more free [he] never meets us without hollowing out a salutation' (23 Feb. 1796). Morritt went on to Rome for Holy Week, and told his sister 'of the lions to be hunted down at Rome. There are at least eighteen or twenty houses, of which each has a rich picture gallery, and many fine collections of statues; add to these the antiquities, and modern artists in all ways that deserve attention, and you will suppose how busy our mornings are. Our evenings are, on the whole, idle. There are no public amusements, and few English in the place' (1 Apr. 1796).Morritt's subsequent movements were dictated by the progress of the French army. He abandoned the idea of Florence, and went instead to Venice 'a nice back door to creep out at' (8 May 1796). He was in Padua on 3 May and in Venice the following day.2 He was there for Ascension and waited, hoping a French reverse might enable him to see Florence. But when the French marched into Venetian territory in June Morritt immediately sailed for Trieste. He went on to Vienna and through Germany, finally landing at Yarmouth in July 1796.Morritt (who is best remembered for the Velazquez Rokeby Venus which he acquired in London c.1814) bought coins and medals in Naples (1-6 Dec. 1795), 'a picture or two' in Rome and 'two most beautiful cameos' in Venice (8 May 1796). In 1835 he published through the Society of Dilettanti an essay on the History and Principles of Antient Sculpture.
When John Bellings arrived in Naples in April 1711 he 'sent for Mr Morrogh who came immediately to see us',1 and in November 1712, when Humphrey Chetham and Basil Kennett arrived in Naples, they 'went directly into Mr Morreaus house having so agreed in Rome'.2

With their two young sons (George, b. 1761, and Hamilton Douglas-Halyburton, b. 1763) 'and a Gentleman and Lady', Lord and Lady Morton arrived in Florence on 13 December 1773. Three days later they left for Naples. Morton thought 'his lungs tender, and that passing a Winter at Naples will be of service'.1 They passed through Capua on 22 December and by the 28th they were settled in Naples,2 where 'young Dr Rutherford' attended Lord Morton.3 On 17 May William Hamilton wrote that the Mortons were to go on a tour of Sicily, and it was there, at Taormina on 25 September, that Lord Morton died of 'a violent fever from a cold he caught on Mount Etna'.4 Lady Morton and her two sons left Naples for England in February 1775; they were in Rome in March 'but are going home as soon as ye season will permit'.5 Francis, Lord Rawdon, observed that the two boys came to Ischia from Naples with thick rashes on their faces and arms; the rashes soon disappeared, only to recur as soon as they returned to Naples.6

Mosman (or Mossman) is said to have been a pupil of Francesco Imperiali in Rome, where he spent six years. Two of his 'heads in pastel' were bought in Rome by James Clerk of Penicuik in 1732-4.1 In September 1735 and August 1736 he attended meetings of the Jacobite Lodge in Rome.2 While in Rome he acted as agent for Captain John Urquhart, for whom he was buying pictures and works of art.3 On 19 February 1740 on his return to Scotland he advertised in Edinburgh a sale of 'Pictures Drawings, Statues, Bustos, Bass-Relievos, Sulphurs, from Intalios and Italian Prints ... collected & done by him during his six years Residence in Rome';4 drawings of classical statues attributed to Mosman were sold from Cullen House in 1975 (Christie's, 22 Sep.). In August 1740 Allan Ramsay learned that Mosman had left Italy owing 70 crowns to Camillo Paderni, also a pupil of Imperiali.5




The 'Lord Moshin' listed in Florence in June 1772,1 was presumably the Mostyn listed by Patrick Home among the English he had met in Italy c.1772-3.2
Maria Motte arrived in Venice on 29 November 1793,1 and on 1 March 1794 'Mrs Motte (formerly Miss Touchet)', travelling through Italy accompanied by a female servant, met Sarah Bentham in the Villa Borghese.2
Lord Mountmorres, clever, talkative and eccentric, arrived in Turin on 12 November 1772.1 On 17 December he was dining with Lord Winchilsea in Florence, but he then left for England, 'without seeing Rome or Naples', as Winchilsea told his mother, 'which I think is a great want of Curiosity, but he says he came abroad to converse with the living & not with ye Dead & as he cannot do that here as he likes he is gone back'. Mountmorres was nevertheless painted by Heygate [?] at the foot of Vesuvius, which he never saw, with Lord Rawdon and Thomas William Coke ascending it (sold in 1887).3
Early in 1761, Lord Mountstuart was sent on an extended grand tour under the supervision of Colonel James Edmonstone of Newtoun. They travelled to Geneva, where Mountstuart was placed under the instruction of Professeur Paul Henri Mallet. He spent over three years there and Liotard painted an exceptional whole-length pastel of him (priv. coll.). He visited Voltaire with his father's political associate the Earl of Holderness in December 1763 and also came to know Edward Gibbon (of whose Roman Club he subsequently became a member).1 Mallet travelled with Mountstuart and Edmonstone to Turin in 1764. Mountstuart continued to study under the former rather than at the Academy there, and presumably saw Louis Dutens, his uncle James Stuart Mackenzie's former tutor, who had remained en poste at Turin. Mountstuart's studies no doubt continued during his unusually long sojourn of three months at Siena in the autumn. With his arrival in Rome in the winter of 1764-5, Mountstuart's grand tour progressed along more conventional lines. The Abbé Grant gave him 'particular' attention and he employed the cicerone Colin Morison: Grant commented on the fluency of his Italian. When Wilkes, who had attacked his father in the North Briton, reached Rome in February 1765 Mountstuart and his companions were the only British travellers not to call on him. While in Rome he commissioned the whole-length portrait by Batoni (Clark/Bowron 312; priv. coll.) which was not finished until 1767 and testifies, like earlier portraits by Zoffany and Liotard, to the sitter's taste for extravagant costume. Mountstuart also patronised George Willison. During his stay of over six weeks at Naples, Mountstuart's movements were monitored by William Hamilton, subsequent letters to whom survive. Soon after his return to Rome he became a close friend of James Boswell, whose diaries and letters of the period, March to 27 July, record Mountstuart's activities and conversations in considerable detail.2 On 27 May Mountstuart's friend Baron Werpup was buried in the Protestant cemetery, where a monument was subsequently erected at his expense; on the 28th Mountstuart and Boswell went on a tour of the Vatican. Boswell's journal gives a full account of the party's progress, and its quarrels, on the way to Venice, where Lord Bute's old friend General William Graeme placed his house at Mountstuart's disposal. Mountstuart was there on 12 July when he came of age, but on the 16th he received a letter from his father summoning him back to England. Boswell travelled with Mountstuart and his party as far as Milan. In 1779 he was appointed envoy in Turin, an office he held for four years. Sir James Harris then wrote how he was glad Mountstuart 'had chosen a line of business, tho' I confess I think he might have fix'd on one more useful to the public & more advantageous to himself. I know well his turn to magnificence & am not surprised at his immoderate train; he will eclipse the Bourbonites as much in real capacity, as in exterior shew & parade'.3 His son John (1767-94) was with him, accompanied by a tutor, Mr Batty,4 and Lady Mountstuart gave birth to another boy on 1 March 1780 (George, 1780-1841, later an Admiral). During the earlier part of his residence his younger brother William Stuart was also with him. Mountstuart took leave between 12 June and 17 November 1781, and finally left Turin late in November 1782.5


Muirhead spent some three years on the Continent, mostly in France. In October 1789 he sailed from Marseilles for Leghorn, where he arrived on the 7th. After spending 'most of the winter' in Pisa, he was called home by 'circumstances of peculiar urgency'. In 1803 he published his Journals of Travels in parts of the late Austrian Low Countries, France, the Pays de Vaud and Tuscany in 1787 and 1789, in which the final pages are devoted to Italy. Muirhead wrote that he would allow the Tuscan 'a love of arts and finery, dexterity and perseverance, attachment to his patriotic sovereign, with more than an ordinary share of duplicity and grimace. In the higher circles, I could instance acts of meanness which an English gentleman would with difficulty believe. But this stricture applies not exclusively to Tuscany, and seems to form a feature of Italian manners' (405).





With both Lord Charlemont's parents dead and only his stepfather, Thomas Adderley, to whom Murphy might apply, responsibility fell heavily on the tutor. He had prepared for the grand tour with a special study of the antiquities of Rome, but eight months after leaving Dublin they were still no further than The Hague. On 4 April 1747 he expressed his frustration in a letter to Charlemont exhorting him to change his pleasure loving ways, pursue his studies, and take Lord Sandwich's advice, which was to go to Turin. Murphy's classical scholarship contributed to the success of the Levantine voyage that followed in 1749. On their return to Rome he was soon happily employed in keeping an eye on the purse strings, organizing excursions to antiquarian sites and showing off his superior knowledge in front of the ciceroni. He was popular with Charlemont's friends, who enjoyed his wild enthusiasms and mild eccentricities. He claimed descent from the Kings of Leinster, liked to be called O'Murragh, and would sign himself Edwardus Rex. Always riding some hobby horse or other, he was a passionate vulcanist. He appeared in Reynolds's Parody of the School of Athens (NGI), painted in Rome in 1751. Sir Thomas Kennedy's accounts show a payment to 'Murfey' for post horses on 18 May 1751.1 In November, while Charlemont stayed in Rome, Murphy took off to Naples to see 'a fiery eruption of Veusivio'. On 18 December 1751 (OS) he wrote Adderley from Rome a lengthy description of the mountain's contours and craters, merely a preface to an account of the eruption, which was promised for a later letter.2 In 1752 his name appeared among the subscribers to Charlemont's Academy for British artists studying in Rome.3 His singular commission to Simon Vierpyl for copies of twenty-two statues and the series of seventy-eight busts of the Roman emperors etc. in the Capitoline Museum took Vierpyl four years to complete. Some money was apparently advanced to the sculptor in September 1753 (when Murphy received by account given in and settled by Charlemont on salary due, £856.7.6 1/2 at £315 per year and £7 allowance for washing).4 Besides being major-domo to the house Charlemont took in Rome, Murphy had to contend with Charlemont's ill-health and bouts of deep depression, his 'anxious moments', and this put him in the way of dictating to the painter John Parker, Charlemont's agent, who was left with much unfinished business on their departure from Rome. Murphy's nine long years of loyal service were rewarded by a pension of £100 a year from 1755,5 but it was not until 1757 that the sum total of arrears of his salary was paid, amounting to £1,395. Charlemont's friends in later years continued to enquire for Murphy who, appropriately enough, retired to Blackrock, Co. Dublin; John Ward wrote 'Pray remember me to the Prince of the Black Rock, the Great Emporor of Lava'.6
Sir Alexander Murray had arrived in Rome by 16 March 1730 with a Mr Hay or Hayes. Stosch had called on them by the 30th, but Murray did not return his visit, according to a solemn promise he had made to the 5th Duke of Hamilton. Stosch alleged he was visiting Jacobites. By 29 June 'Hayes', Murray's companion, had left Rome, his conduct, said Stosch, having been 'extremely suspect'. By 6 July Murray had left Rome for Naples. He returned to Rome where he was 'still' on 16 November and was friendly with 'Ratcliff' [doubtless Charles Radclyffe], but by 30 November he had again gone to Naples, this time with 'Morton' [probably Sir Robert Myrton]. They had returned by 28 December.1 Sometime between 4 March and 29 May 1731 he was in Padua,2 and on 1 June Elizeus Burges reported Murray and Myrton among those who had attended the Ascension at Venice and gone on to Bologna 'where is a famous Opera that is to last all this month'.3 Joseph Spence met a 'Sir Al. Murray' in Lyons between May and October 17314 (and Myrton was certainly in Lyons on 18 October).

Lady Catherine and Miss Murray' were in Naples in January 1777.1 Catherine Murray, the sixteen-year-old daughter of James and Lady Catherine Murray, died in Leghorn on 28 April 1777.2



She came to Venice with her brother when he was appointed British resident in 1754 and in 1757 she married, as his second wife, Joseph Smith, the consul. 'A Beauteous Virgin of 40', commented Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, 'who after having refus'd all the peers in England because the Nicety of her Conscience would not permit her to give her Hand when her Heart was untouch'd, she remain'd without a Husband till the charms of that fine Gentleman Mr Smith, who is only 82, determin'd her to change her Condition'.1 In July 1757 Robert Adam said Mrs Smith was 'facetious, frank and of a sweet turn of behaviour'.2 She nursed her husband's final years assisted by her niece, Catherine Murray. After her husband's death in 1770, she sold his palazzo in 1775,3 and returned with Catherine to England in 1778.
Following the Jacobite defeat at Culloden, Lord George Murray escaped to the Continent and spent some six months in Italy.1 In December 1746 he was in Venice with Lord Elcho and the Earl Marischal, and on 17/21 March 1747 he was received with some ceremony by the Pretender in Rome.2 He was in Venice in June on his way back from Rome, and by July 1747 he was in Paris.
George Murray was in Florence on 18 October 1765, when Horace Mann introduced him to the Grand Duke and Duchess, with whom he dined on 'about the 18th'.1 Lord Halifax introduced 'Mr Murray brother of the Duke of Athol' to William Hamilton in Naples in a letter of 28 June 1765.2 It is unclear whether the 'Sig. Murray, fratello del Duca de Athol', in Florence in January 1767 with a Captain Howdel, was the same (it could also have been his brother James Murray, an army officer).3

Murray evacuated his family from Minorca during the French siege. His wife and infant daughter arrived in Leghorn, with 'about twenty other ladies', on 31 August 1781; having left Minorca the day the French landed, they had accomplished their journey in twelve days. Mrs Murray gave birth to a son at Leghorn on 25 January 1782. After the surrender of Minorca, the General himself arrived at Leghorn on 25 March 1782. He visited Horace Mann in Florence early in April, returning to Leghorn 'much indisposed'. On the 25th he and his family sailed from Leghorn 'in feluccas for Antibes' (Wal.Corr. 25:179-80, 269, 271).

The little man', as Lumisden called him, was principal physician to the Pretender.1 He had been in Rome from 1730, living near the Piazza di Spagna 1730-5, and in the Strada Felice 1738-55 (he was already described as surgeon to the King of England, i.e. the Pretender, in 1738, and his age was given as thirty-nine in 1738).2 He attended Jonathan Skelton in his last illness in Rome in January 1759.3 A story was told that as he was going round Rome with a party he asked a lady after her husband; 'sta bene', she said; 'So I thought', said the Doctor, 'for I gave him a proper strong dose last night'; 'Sta in cielo! e morto' she continued.4 Father Thorpe remembered how Lord Mountstuart had attended the Pope's solemn mass on Easter Day [presumably in 1765] with the 'Scots surgeon Mr Murray', and how the 'vulgar remarks' of 'that peevish Puritan' had earned him a strong rebuke.5 In April 1765 Dr Murray diagnosed Boswell's venereal disease.6 In February 1769 William Drake told his father that 'little Murray' was 'still living & very hearty'.7
Though he alleged there was no 'quarrelsome temper nor sacyness' in his character, Murray appears to have been both ambitious and peevish.1 After he was unseated as MP for Elgin Burghs in 1715 he had acted as a Jacobite agent in England and Scotland. In 1718 he joined the Jacobite court in Italy, and was immediately sent in June to Ohlau (Silesia) to make formal proposals of marriage between the Pretender and the young Princess Clementina Sobieska. He returned to Rome in August in poor health. When the Princess finally arrived in Italy the Pretender was in Spain, having left Murray in charge in his absence, and he had to receive Clementina in Bologna on 9 May 1719. On the 10th Murray 'had the honour to marry her, in the K's name by vertue of a procuration'.  As a favourite of the Pretender, Murray assumed considerable power, despite his comparative youth. When the Earl of Mar was interned in Switzerland in 1720, he recommended Murray should temporarily fill his post and, among other complaints then made against him, it was said that Murray kept everyone at a distance from Clementina - his sister, Mrs John Hay, alone excepted. Captain John Ogilvie described Murray as 'a young, vain, white-livered Jackanapes'. Murray complained of such criticism to the Pretender and asked for some sign of recognition, despite the fact that he was now markedly out of favour with Clementina. He was duly created Earl of Dunbar, after which he left Rome on 6 February 1721 and, travelling through Spoleto (where he was attended by the Pretender's physician, Dr Robert Wright), Modena, Parma and Milan, he went to live in France for four years. His place at court was filled by his brother-in-law, John Hay. In the summer of 1725 he was recalled to Rome to be (the Protestant) governor of Charles, the Young Pretender, and in the same year Hay was appointed the Pretender's secretary in succession to the Earl of Mar. Murray arrived in Rome from France in mid-September.2 After the dismissal of John Hay (who had become the Jacobite Earl of Inverness) in 1727, Murray also assumed the duties of chief adviser to the Pretender. He accompanied Charles at the seige of Gaeta in July 1734 and on his Italian tour in 1737, and he finally helped him leave Italy in 1744, prior to the 1745 rebellion in Scotland. Murray left Rome on 8 April 1747, initially to meet Charles in Spain. He missed him there and, as Charles led his dissipated life in France and Germany, Murray settled with his widowed sister in Avignon. He became a Catholic convert in 1751, and died in Avignon in August 1770. Outside the Palazzo Muti Murray was evidently regarded with some respect. For the Président de Brosses he was 'homme d'esprit et fort estimé',3 and young Horace Walpole in 1740 found him 'very sensible, very agreeable and well-bred'.4 His portrait by Trevisani is in a Scottish private collection.

Once described as 'a handsome Bacchus painted by Rubens',1 John Murray arrived in Venice as British resident on 9 October 17542 with, apparently, his wife, Lady Wentworth, and his sister Elizabeth. It was said Murray came from the Isle of Man and he had been 'a good deal' Horace Mann's acquaintance in England.3 Murray told his patron, Lord Holderness (his wife's first cousin), that on his arrival he took 'to courting Consul Smith, but he played me so many tricks that I could not forbear telling him my Mind very freely'.4 Within a year, however, he was writing contentedly that his wife 'laughs and grows fat, my Sister the same', and 'In short my Lord, you have putt us into so good a pasture that if we dont Change the Soil we shall all burst'.5 Within another year his middle-aged sister Elizabeth had married consul Joseph Smith, and Murray had fallen foul of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu; he was 'a scandalous fellow in every sense of that word', she wrote; 'he is not to be trusted to change a Sequin, despis'd by this Government for his smuggling, which was his original proffession, and always surrounded with Pimps and brokers, who are his Privy Counsellors'.6 The occasion for her remarkable outburst may have been a political difference, but Casanova also hinted at another side of Murray's character; he was 'prodigieusement amateur du beau sexe, de Baccus et de la bonne chère ... sautant d'une à l'autre il avait toujours les plus jolies filles de Venise'.7 Murray's relations with Mann continued to be amicable, and in 1764 Murray asked Mann to choose him a summer coat 'as our flower'd silks are very bad'; but remember, he said, that it is 'for a Man upon ye point of fifty and of enormous size'.8  According to James Martin,9 Murray had a good collection of pictures; 'several by Titian, & other Masters of the Venetian School', including a Raising of Lazarus and 'some Church Function' by Veronese, 'some very good Pictures by the Prate Genoese', and a small Durer 'in high Preservation', elsewhere identified as a Conversion of St Hubert.10 He sat to Benjamin West in 1763 (now untraced),11 and he appeared in Richard Brompton's picture of the Duke of York and his friends of 1764 (see Brompton). On 31 July 1764 John Morgan remarked that the young artist was 'very intimate at ye Resident's'.12 Murray's wife helped the young Angelica Kauffman, who came to Venice in October 1765, and took her to London, where they arrived on 22 June 1766.13 Murray, meanwhile, had left Venice on 11 May 17662 to take up a new position as ambassador in Constantinople; 'I most surely do not envy him', wrote Mann, 'but in the eyes of the diplomatic world this is a vast stride above Resident'.14 Nine years later, having left Constantinople on 25 May 1775,15 Murray sailed back to Venice where he died in the lazzaretto on 9 August 1775, aged sixty-one; he was buried in the Protestant cemetery in the Lido.16 His wife had died the previous year.
Mr Evidence Murray' as he became known in Jacobite circles, went to Rome in 1737, having spent two years at Leiden University. He was admitted to the Masonic Lodge at Rome on 20 August 1737. He was frequently with the Young Pretender in Rome in 1738, but was back in Edinburgh by December 1738 (Murray Memorials, x-xi. Tayler 1941, 204-8).
In 1762 Peggy Murray became engaged to the traveller and explorer James Bruce, who was in Africa from 1763 to 1773. In 1768 she came out to Italy with her brother William. In March they had 'been this good while at Florence' and were 'soon expected' in Rome but, wrote Margaret Forbes, 'I hear that they are to make no stay but are to proceed to Naples'.1 In August they went to 'Caprasonti, 36 miles from Rome', with the Abbé Grant, who thought that Miss Murray was very well, and 'grown much plumper since she went to the country'.2 In January 1769 she was about to become a Catholic in order to marry the Marchese Accaromboni. By 15 February she was converted, thereby, wrote Alessandro Verri, gaining eternal and temporal life, for with her fragile health she could not survive in England, but now with her dowry of 9,000 scudi she married a very good man who is just as rich.3  At Easter 1769 'Margarita Sorella Cattolica' aged twenty-four was living in the Via Babuino with her brother Thomas [sic] Murray ('Tommaso Morai Scozzese Protestante' aged twenty-six).4 In September 1769 the Abbé Grant returned 'from the country' with Margaret Murray, the new wife of the Marchese Filippo Accaromboni, whom he called her music teacher.5 The next month she was 'in great good health and looks' and had promised to sit for the young Scottish painter Anne Forbes.6 In November 1771 Mrs Home remarked on Accaromboni's wealth and said the Marchesa was 'so fat, so terribly with child from top to toes'.7  James Bruce, her quondam fiancé, had meanwhile returned to Italy from his voyages in 1773 and was surprised to discover that Margaret had married; she fainted at the sight of him. Bruce, a huge man, demanded satisfaction from Accaromboni who protested 'you were entirely unknown to me', and honour was thereby satisfied.8 In the late 1770s the Marchesa sat to Batoni (Sotheby's, 13 Jul. 1994) and she and her husband remained accommodating hosts to British and particularly Scottish visitors in Rome. But it seems the Marchesa never quite recovered from the reappearance of James Bruce, and she died at the comparatively early age of thirty-eight; their daughter was then placed in a convent in Rome.9

Murray and his tutor, the Rev. Daniel Robertson, were in Venice on 13 October 1791.1 In the James Byres inventory of 1790 about six pictures are marked as sold to 'P. Murray',2 and Murray also owned three portraits painted by Archibald Skirving at Rome, of himself, his tutor and a Self-portrait.3
Sir P Murray', probably a Jacobite, was with Sir James Wemyss in Rome from 23 December 1737 to February 1738, and in Naples in March (Sinclair jnl.MSS, 23 Dec. 1737, 8, 17 Feb., 4 Mar. 1738).

Murray met John Parkinson in Rome on 6 March 1784, telling him of a plant which was a powerful antidote to perfume; on 9 March he dined with Parkinson and a Mr Pelham.1 William Assheton met Sir William and Lady Murray in Rome sometime between December 1783 and May 1784.2
Mr Morrow sone to ye late Lord Stormont whose brother is secr to ye pretdr came hither last week from Rome'; although he had told the consul, Neil Brown, that he was not in contact with the Pretender, the resident, Alexander Cunningham, witheld his passport to France (SP 99/62, f.300; 21 Jul. 1719).



An Etonian with Horace & Juvenal at his fingers end & his tongues end too',1 he was in Florence late in October 1783 and at Naples with Sir George Warren and a Mr Hallet when Parkinson called on him on 20 January 1784.2 Mary Berry also met him in Naples on 30 January and 7 February, and at Cumae and on Vesuvius on 20 and 25 February.3 Musgrave was next in Rome in March and April,2 following James Byres's course of antiquities with Parkinson, Jonas Brooke, Thomas Brand and others.1 Parkinson noticed him on 11 March, and on 21 April he was one of a large party (which included Thomas Pitt, Hallett and a Mr Repington) visiting the Villa Madama.2 On 19 May Musgrave was visiting the Doge's Palace in Venice with Pitt, Repington, the Asshetons and Parkinson; he was in Verona on 2 June, still with Pitt and the Asshetons.2
Miss Musgrave was with Lady Gertrude Villiers in Venice in September 1792,1 and they were together in Naples in November- December the following year.2 On 28 May 1794 'Miss Musgrau Inglese Pittore' and 'Miledi Gertrude de Villiars' arrived in Venice from Rome, with the 2nd Earl Grandison.3


Mylne's experiences in Italy contrast with those of his contemporary Robert Adam. He had an annual allowance from his father of £30, where Adam spent £800-900 each year, and whereas Adam's social position enabled him to obtain honorary membership of Italian academies, Mylne's equivalent memberships came as a direct result of his unprecedented victory in the 1758 Concorso Clementino at the Accademia di S. Luca. His experience is principally described in a series of letters he wrote from Italy (Mylne letters MSS).  Mylne joined his brother William in Paris in October 1754. During 1754 William, who had been studying at Blondel's Ecole des Arts, had suggested that Robert should join him and that they should proceed together to Rome. They left Paris on 5 December, and much of this journey was accomplished on foot. On 3 January 1755 they announced their intention of taking the next boat for Civitavecchia and, although there is no further letter until September, it can be assumed that they reached Rome in January as planned, taking up residence at 3 Via Condotti.1 The brothers were together in Italy until about July 1757, when William set out for home. In Rome Robert began by studying existing buildings rather than making designs. He also drew after statues and from the life, presumably at the Accademia del Nudo.2 In September 1755 Robert wrote that the technical aspects of architecture were best studied under the direction of an Italian master, but it is not known whether he followed this precept. At some point, however, Mylne met Piranesi, since he was called a 'scholar of Piranesi' in 1759, and a letter from Piranesi to Mylne in London of 11 November 1760 speaks of their mutual and eternal friendship.3 For most of 1756, with the exception of a six-week 'jaunt' to Naples to see remains of antique architecture and Vesuvius,4 Mylne lived at Rome and continued to work in much the same manner, additionally reporting that he was making clay models of ornaments. At this time his companions were James Nevay and a Mr Adams. This can hardly have been Robert Adam, however, who was described damningly by Mylne in February 1756 as making no more impression as an architect than the Mylnes themselves.5 Other acquaintances were Andrew Lumisden, George Hay, a brother of Lord Somerville, and a son of John Scott. A hiatus occurs in Mylne's letters between January 1757 and January 1758, but William Mylne's correspondence shows that Robert visited Tivoli, Anzio and Nettuno in the autumn.  Between February and June 1757 Mylne visited Sicily with the draughtsman Matthew Nulty and Richard Phelps. A passport for Mylne to Messina and Malta was dated Naples 26 February.6 Phelps was intent on publishing a book on the antique remains of the island7 and Mylne hoped to use his work on this book to fill in the gap between his arrival in London and the launching of his career. In about August 1757 Mylne began preparing designs for the First Class Premium in Architecture of the 1758 Concorso Clementino at the Accademia di S.Luca.8 It is said that in 1757 Richard Brompton drew Mylne's profile portrait (engraved at Paris by Vangeliste in 1783), but see Brompton.  Mylne spent 1758 entirely at Rome, living with James Maxwell in the Via Condotti, following the departure of William the previous summer. His circle of acquaintance grew among British artists and he also met George Lucy9 and Lord Brudenell. He began to take travelling amateurs as pupils and taught the principles of architecture to Lord Garlies, whom he had met through Dr James Irwin. Through Nathaniel Dance, Mylne was introduced to an unnamed Dresden merchant, from whom he received his first commission for a house design. The Abbé Grant recommended Mylne as an instructor to William Fermor, for whom Mylne was to build Tusmore in 1766, the only commission received in Italy which he was destined to execute.10  On 6 September 1758 Mylne submitted his designs for the Concorso Clementino (the preliminary studies are now in the RIBA, the finished drawing is in the Accademia), and the following day took the prova examination (drawing now in the Cooper-Hewitt Museum). On 9 September Mylne was elected the victor. He immediately contemplated entering the first concorso of the newly-founded Parma academy, writing for the subject on 12 September.11 Subsequent events in Rome presumably dissuaded him from the necessity of competing again. On 18 September, in front of the Pretender, Mylne received his silver medal in a ceremony of music and oration.12 It was the first time that a Briton had carried off a medal in the Roman concorsi. Mylne was taken up by Prince Altieri, through whose offices the Pope was petitioned for the permission necessary for a Protestant to be admitted as honorary academician at S.Luca. Mylne was elected Accademico di Merito on 14 January 1759 and took his seat on 4 February, the membership fee, ceremonial toga and black silk cloak costing £14 and necessitating a plea to his father for an additional allowance of £40.  New acquaintances in late 1758 and early 1759 included Edward Dering, Lord Archibald Hamilton and Adam Ferguson, and a Mr Knight and a Mr Miller became new pupils. Mylne was asked to produce illustrations for a book on the medicinal properties of the Roman baths which Dr Irwin intended to write13 (but by February Irwin had died). He was also asked for sketches for two houses: Broughton for James Murray, a commission procured through Murray's brother-in-law Lord Garlies, and Mersham Hatch in Kent for Sir Wyndham Knatchbull-Wyndham. Mylne's last months in Italy between January and June 1759 were thus ones of triumph. He made a fifteen-day excursion to Tuscany in January, during which he met Robert Surtees, and he left Rome for good on 6 April,14 travelling with Ferguson and thus without expense. At Florence he was offered membership of the Accademia del Disegno, and elected like Adam as a dilettante and not as an artist (as had been the case with Chambers in 1753).15 Mylne's name is also recorded as honorary member of the Accademia Clementina at Bologna,16 though by the date of that election he had reached Brescia and already spent a fortnight at Venice, a city which he found insignificant for an architect. Travelling now with Louis Devisme, Mylne visited several of Palladio's buildings during June, taking no more than general notes of their situations. By the third week of July, Mylne had reached London having passed through Switzerland, Germany and Holland.
William Mylne's travels in Italy provide an interesting account of the education of a British architect.1 In Paris from early 1754, Mylne followed a course of instruction under J.-F. Blondel, similar to that of William Chambers. At Rome, although he worked for most of 1755 under one of the pensioners from the Ecole de France (introduced to him by Chambers), Mylne's progress soon slipped behind that of his elder brother, and by the time Robert won the Concorso Clementino in 1758, William had left for home. Mylne's eclipse by his elder brother is also attested by the surviving letters. A frequent correspondent both before Robert's arrival in Paris and after separating from his brother, there is only one letter by William (dated 29 September 1756) from the period when they were together at Rome in the Via Condotti; in it he apologises for his long silence and expresses his desire to return to Scotland, adding that Robert has no such desire to leave Rome. Perhaps the brothers' poverty (each received an allowance of £30 per annum from their father), or the Italian climate weighed more heavily on William than on Robert; writing from Vicenza on 13 January 1758, William described himself as heat-shrunken, toothless and squinting. The weary Mylne suffered one further indignity on his journey homeward, narrowly avoiding being pressed by German troops near the Tyrolean border, by destroying all his documentation and passing as an Italian in February 1758. William Mylne's studies of buildings in the Veneto provide a stark contrast to the activities of his brother Robert just over a year later. Whereas Robert went to little effort in recording the work of Palladio, William was assiduous in his inspection of buildings by both Palladio and Scamozzi and made some of the most thorough studies of them of any later eighteenth-century travelling Briton. In Rome William Mylne knew James Nevay, Solomon Delane and James Maxwell, while Nathaniel Dance painted his portrait.2 On 13 December 1755 Robert Adam had noted the presence of Mylne in Rome as one who had studied in France and thus had 'that abominable taste to perfection',3 but thereafter Adam's venomous rivalry was all to be directed at the greater perceived threat of Robert ('Blackfriars') Mylne.

The James Myres, writing from Rome on 29 July 1775 to Lord Huntingdon describing the celebrations held in honour of the Archduke Maximilian, was almost certainly a misreading of James Byres (HMC Hastings, 3:155-6).
He may be identified as the 'Chev. Morton' who had 'returned' to Rome by 2 November 1730 with Richard and William Wynne and their governor James Hay, and who later that month went to Naples from Rome with Sir Alexander Murray; they had returned to Rome by 28 December.1 'Sr Robert Mirton' was among a number of travellers (again including Sir Alexander Murray) in Venice for Ascension in 1731 who went on to Bologna to see 'a famous opera that is to last all [June]'.2 In September 1731 he had left Florence for Pistoia with Lord Nithsdale and Thomas Tyrrell.3 He returned to Venice in March 1732 with Hay and Richard Wynne, again designing to stay 'until after ye Ascension'.4 In October 1732 he was in Lyons with Charles Stanhope.5
Mytton's tour is described in a series of factual letters addressed to his father in Montgomeryshire (Mytton letters MSS; dates given in brackets). He came to Italy from Nice, having left Avignon on 26 September 1778. In Nice he had joined two 'Parisians very genteel young men', similarly determined to see everything in Italy 'at as small an expence as possible'. At Genoa, where they spent nine days, he took to calling himself D'Evreux, and acquired from the French consul introductions to the Grand Duke in Florence, Cardinal Aquaviva in Rome and the Pope's nuncio at Naples (Placentia, 19 Oct. 1778). In Rome, where he found he could no longer pass as D'Evreux, he met Lady Berkeley and Lady Lucan with their daughters and, observed Pope Pius VI, whom he thought was 'amongst the handsomest men I have seen' (Rome, 28 Nov. 1778). He wrote from Naples on 24 March 1779, that he was about to 'steer to the North again', having enjoyed 'a continuous clear sky' for three months. He travelled back with six Frenchmen, one of his original companions having stayed behind in Rome; they were in Venice for Ascension, Mytton then intending to go on to Turin, after which he would have seen 'all the principal towns of Italy' (Milan, 25 May 1779).
On his first visit to Italy Mytton spent much of his time with Thomas Robinson (later 2nd Baron Grantham), James Grant of Castle Grant and Thomas Wynn (later Lord Newborough). 'My old acquaintance Mr Mytton' was in Turin with Robinson in August 1759, and they then intended to go to Rome with Wynn and Grant.1 Mytton and Robinson probably shared James Grant's itinerary, through Milan and Florence to Naples in January 1760 and back to Rome. Mytton appears with Wynn, Grant and Robinson in the conversation piece painted by Nathaniel Dance in Rome (see James Grant). Robinson and Mytton stayed on in Rome after Grant and Wynn had departed, intending to leave for Florence on 13 July,2 but Robinson was still in Rome in August (about to sit to Mengs). On 8 October Cardinal Albani in Rome sent to Horace Mann in Florence 'un joyeau en fer blanc' for Mytton,3 and Mytton's subsequent itinerary may have been shared with Robinson. He was presumably the Mytton who witnessed Lady Mary Wortley Montagu's will in Venice on 3 April 1761.4  Mytton returned to Italy in 1765. On 9 March the Abbé Grant in Rome told James Grant: 'Two days ago who cast up here but your friend Mr Mytton, the same who was here at Garnieri's with you and Robinson & c.',5 and on 31 March William Palgrave also told Grant that he had been 'much amazed to see Mytton here [in Rome], with no other errand but to buy some pictures and return'.6 Sir William Farington saw him on 1 April7 and on 5 June Thomas Jenkins told James Grant 'your friend Mr Mytton has made us a second visit, the only thing he wanted to make Rome perfectly agreeable to him was the rest of the Guernieri set'.8 By 17 June Mytton was in Marseilles.7
He was presumably the 'Mytten' in Spa in July 1723 with Thomas Anson and Simon Degge.1 A collection of monumental inscriptions in Italy made by and for Mytton c.1725 is in the National Library of Wales (Sweeney MSS, 13).
Little Nairn', with his 'ingenious' conversation1 had joined the exiled Jacobite court at Saint-Germain-en-Laye as a young man in 1689, his fluent French helping him obtain posts as translator and secretary. He was first in Italy in 1691, accompanying the Jacobite ambassador Lord Melfort as his private secretary; he had returned to Saint-Germain by November that year.2  In 1717, when over seventy, he accompanied the Pretender to Rome as one of his closest associates. They arrived late in May and on 11 June Nairne wrote that they had seen 'fine pictures and statues, all of which, old as I am, I am not philosopher enough to despise, especially the music part ... As for the ceremonial part, I canot say I like it, for nobody does'.3 The Pretender then told the Earl of Mar he thought Nairne would 'live a year longer';4 his health was not robust, and he was laid up in Urbino in July.5 In April 1718 he was well enough to fall for a young Bolognese singer who then came to Urbino, but he was then unwell again in June.6 He remained attached to the court in Italy as it moved between Montefiascone, Urbino and Rome, and his name occurs frequently in Jacobite correspondence (HMC Stuart). Later, in September 1733, Stosch said 'Sir David Nairn, the Pretender's treasurer' was in Florence with Lord and Lady Bellew, and was going secretly to England; but they had left for Bologna by 3 October.7 On 7 March 1735 Nairne (described as Sir David Nairne, the King's old secretary) was in Paris with his daughter Marie (who had married the former tutor of the Stuart Princes, Andrew Michael Ramsay).8
Mr Henry Nairne, son of John Lord Nairne, which gentleman is at present with the Prince' sent to England a portrait of the Young Pretender in 1787; on 26 March 1788 he wrote from Rome that he was determined to leave for Paris (E.M. Graham, Oliphants of Gask, 325-6).




Nasmyth went to Italy on a subsidy of £500 provided by Patrick Miller of Dalswinton, and with letters of introduction from Sir John Dick, the former consul at Leghorn, and Philip Yorke (later 3rd Earl of Hardwicke).1 James Byres welcomed him in Rome in April 1783 and in June was telling Yorke that Nasmyth was 'very diligent' and determined to 'follow Landskip painting, and is at present copying a very fine picture of mine by Claude Lorrain'.2 Nasmyth lodged in the Via Babuino, next door to Nathaniel Marchant. In February 1784 Nasmyth was copying Guido Reni's Magdalen for Yorke, and he left Rome at the beginning of August.3 Nasmyth was also said to have visited Florence, Bologna and Padua, and there are views by him of Naples and Lake Bolsena.
With his tutor, Patrick Wood, Sir James was in Padua in September 1724,1 and arrived in Rome in November.2 On 10 January 1725 they left for Naples with Samuel Rolle and his tutor Walter Bowman, to hear the opera. They all returned to Rome on 2 February, having come on foot from Ostia in order to see the ceremony of the Festival of the Purification 'and receive the blessed candle'. Nasmyth and Wood left Rome on 16 February setting out for Florence on their way to England; Stosch said they had been in touch with Jacobites in Rome. Sometime between 2 and 9 March they were introduced to the Grand Duke in Florence.3
The 'Chevalier Thomas Nesmith', lately arrived from Moscow with other Jacobites, was living 'in friendship' with Dr [James] Hay and his brother, Captain Hay (SP 85/15; Walton, 6 Jan. 1725).
In Naples in October 1795 Nassau was asking to take back to England a horse he had bought there.1 'Federico Nassau Inglese' was travelling in northern Italy between Venice and Bergamo with Augustus de Ramm ['Rhamm', 'Rhanum'] of Brunswick, from December 1795 to May 1796.2


While travelling on the Continent from 1736, Naylor was sent a series of letters by his uncle, the Bishop of Chichester,1 which furnish much of the above itinerary. 'Mr Nayler' arrived in Florence on 1 October 1739;2 Lady Pomfret saw him there in December, and noted his departure for Rome on 27 February 1740.3 At Easter 1741 'Neilo Ingle' was living in the Casa dei Gesuati in Rome,4 where Lady Pomfret met him in March and recorded his departure with Nathaniel Castleton on 4 May.5 She finally encountered him in Venice on 5 June and Padua on 18 June.6

A learned, accurate, easy man', Needham once told James Boswell he followed 'just the study which pleased him at the time, and went on calm and moderate'.1 Between 1760 and 1765 he spent much time in northern Italy acting as tutor to Lord Gormanston and Charles Dillon, and conducting his own researches into Egyptian hieroglyphics. He came to believe that the symbols inscribed on an ancient bust in the Royal Museum of Antiquities in Turin were Egyptian and that their resemblance to Chinese characters indicated a common origin. He published his theory in De Inscriptione quadam aegyptica Taurini inventa [Rome 1761], which attracted strong criticism; Winckelmann, Bartoli and Assemani believed the bust to be Italian and the symbols astrological, while Gibbon wrote (in May 1764) that Needham's publications demonstrated 'une ignorance, un defaut de logique, un zele aigre et un air de decision qui m'a revoltè'2 (in July, however, Gibbon commissioned a drawing of an Egyptian statue in the Uffizi for his friend Needham, see Gibbon). Lord Tavistock, Edmund Rolfe, and Haughton James contributed 'a purse of 300 for Needham to prosecute his discoveries which', wrote Sir Richard Lyttelton, 'has the little man very happy'.3 The Egyptian controversy would indicate Needham was in Turin in 1760; thereafter he was recorded in Milan in April 1761 with Lord Gormanston. On 15 December 1761 he went from Rome to Naples with Rolfe; they left Naples on 5 February and were back in Rome on the 11th; later that month they were about to leave Rome for Turin and Paris.3 Dutens said Needham left Turin for Paris in May 1762.4  He was back in Turin in August and September 1764 with Charles Dillon, and James Martin and Boswell met him there between January and April 1765, Boswell talking with him of the Trinity, Trappists and chastity.5 On 10 January 1765 John Wilkes told his daughter that 'the most agreeable object I have seen here [Turin] is Mr Needham'.6




Payments made through Coutts show James Nelthorpe had been in France from February 1735 and was expected in Leghorn after August 1737. He had been in Rome before March 1738,1 George Sinclair seeing him there on 2 February.2 With William Ponsonby and John Mackye he accompanied Lord Sandwich on his voyage round the Mediterranean between April and October that year, see John, 4th Earl of Sandwich. They arrived back in Florence on 19 October 1738, Nelthorpe and Mackye then intending to start back to England on the 21st.3 However, on 4 November Nelthorpe was in Venice and considering spending some time there.4


Nephew painter from Edenburrough' arrived in Rome in 1755.1 In February that year Lumisden wrote that Nevay had arrived 'a few weeks past'; he was a 'well disposed lad; I am told he is much advanced in his profession'; he was to study under Mengs and, said Lumisden, 'I shall recommend him strongly to that master'.2 Nevay lodged with Mengs in the Strada Vittoria from 1758 to 1761 (when Mengs left for Spain);3 in 1758 he was sharing with Colin Morison and Richard Brompton and in 1759 with Brompton alone.  He was evidently a diligent scholar. On 3 March 1759 Richard Dalton told Lord Bute that 'Young [John] Seton and one Navy mind their studys very much and hope will succeed in portraits very well'.4 That same year Lumisden wrote to Nevay's father, David, justifying his son's protracted absence in Rome: 'virtuous and frugal he has no motives to detain him in Italy but the desire of improving in an art for which he has an excellent genius'; while his drawing and composition progressed he had had 'little time to arrive at an equal skill in colouring. It is to do so that his professor M. Mengs wishes that you would allow him to continue some little time longer in Rome'.5 In the event Nevay stayed another fifty years. Nevay was a slow worker and the titles of only six of his historical compositions are known. None has survived. In 1762 the Abbé Grant, who had previously introduced him to James Grant of Castle Grant, introduced Nevay to the 7th Earl of Strathmore. He commissioned two large history pictures, The Saving of Cyrus and The Arrival of Agrippina, offering yearly payments of £100 until they were finished, with a further £100 when they were delivered to the Abbé in Rome.6 The Agrippina was shown at the SA in 1775. James Martin had seen the Cyrus in Nevay's studio in July 1764, together with a sketch for the Agrippina.7 In 1765, three years after the commission, Nevay had 'at last' finished The Finding of Cyrus.8 In 1769 he finished the Agrippina; Alexander Runciman wrote from Rome in September that Nevay had 'after ten years seige finished a picture',9 and Margaret Forbes wrote (29 August) that it was 'most beautiful' and was going to England 'two weeks hence'.10 The Cyrus and Agrippina were subsequently 'sold for shameful prices' as by Gavin Hamilton at Lord Strathmore's sale (Christie's, 24 Jan. 1777).11 In 1762, at the same time as the Strathmore commissions, the Duke of Roxburghe had considered commissioning two history pieces; Nevay produced sketches of an Aeneas and Andromache and a Death of Lucretia, but nothing more is heard of them.12 In June 1772 Patrick Home saw Nevay working on a Hector taking leave of his son Astyanax for a Mr Rochford.13 His last historical composition seems to have been an Alexander which he began in 1786 for the 4th Earl of Bristol.14 On 6 May 1787 Pacetti took Hamilton (presumably Gavin) to see Nevay's 'belli quadri'.15 Nevay was also active as a copyist. In 1759 he was copying Titian's Venus and Adonis in the Colunna Palace for Lord Garlies (later 7th Earl of Galloway);16 in June 1758 Robert Mylne had said that Nevay had failed to meet Lord Garlies's deadline, though whether this was the same commission is unclear.17 In 1764 he engraved four heads after Guercino, the plate appearing in Piranesi's Raccolta di Alcuni Disegni di Guercino. In July 1764 James Martin saw in Nevay's studio 'some very good Drawings ... in red Chalk from most of the best Statues in & about Rome',7 and in 1769 Margaret Forbes said he had 'undertaken to make a great many drawings from the most capital statues in Rome'.10 In 1772 Nevay was copying for William Constable a Fortune by Guido Reni, a head of Sappho, and a Jupiter and Juno by Carracci (the first and last at Burton Constable).18 In 1773 he showed five drawings after Michelangelo's Last Judgment at the RA; in June 1772 Patrick Home had seen in his studio five drawings after Michelangelo which seemed to him 'well done, uncommonly so - great force, and with a free pencil'.13 In 1786 Nevay copied the Aldobrandini Marriage for the 4th Earl of Bristol; finished in December, it was 'exceedingly beautiful and Carfully done', said Jacob More.14 In 1790 and 1791 Nevay exhibited drawings from the antique and from Michelangelo at the SA.  In 1777 the French painter Gabriel Bouquier said that Nevay, who had only ever finished one canvas, was a 'peintre penseur et systematique' who, from the time he completed the Agrippina, had turned to studying the theory and particularly the colours of old masters, in company with the Flemish painter F.J. Lonsing (who came to Rome in 1761 and left in 1778). Together they experimented in the chemistry of colour with various earths, including sand from Fiumicino, and animal bones, pursuing a secret unknown to Correggio or Titian; but they achieved nothing practical; Nevay, observed Bouquier, was a good draughtsman, and Lonsing a good colourist.19  James Irvine described Nevay (in 1781) as 'one of the strangest characters imaginable', living a solitary life and 'of so whimsical a temper that one knows not in what way to take him yet he is respected as a worthy honest man'; apparently Nevay had once refused to paint a picture for a considerable sum 'because he could not make the figures as large as life. The gentleman said if they were so large he had not a room that would contain it'.11 When he was teaching Anne Forbes in Rome in 1768-9, the rumour of a romance was enough to keep him away from her and her mother: he used to call on them daily but afterwards had to be summoned.20 While James Barry thought well of him as a man and an artist,21 Robert Mylne fell out with him in 1759,16 and Alexander Runciman was strongly against him as a result of some 'scene of Villainy that's been practised here [in Rome] for some time'.9  Nevay inevitably developed a sense of connoisseurship and we hear of him helping the 4th Earl of Bristol to acquire a painting from a Count Shambrosky in Naples, and Jacob More quoted Nevay's opinion that a St Francis belonging to Alexander Day was a copy.22 Day was a friend of Nevay and one of the many British artists with whom he shared rooms in Rome. From 1768-74 Nevay lived in the Strada Felice, sharing with David Allan 1768-9, Laurent Pêcheux 1770-1, Solomon Delane 1770 and 1772, and H.P. Dean 1772-3. In 1774 Nevay was in the Strada Gregoriana with Day and Ozias Humphry. He returned to the Strada Felice in 1776, again sharing with Humphry in 1776-7 and then with Alexander Day in 1778-9 (in 1779 Northcote was with them). In 1790 and 1793 Day and Nevay were listed together at the Arco della Regina (Rome Lists). Nevay last appears in Pacetti's diary on 2 August 1799 (when he called with G.A. Wallis and Cavaceppi) and on 26 August 1804 he estimated the value of a portrait of [by?] Leonardo. In 1811 he was still living in the Strada Felice with Day; by then he must have been over 80 and, since his name does not recur in the parish registers, he probably died that year.23 Nevay's age was given as 45 in 1779, 49 in 1783 and 75 in 1805.

On 4 July 1772 Richard Neville and his father were visiting Voltaire at Ferney.1 In November 1772 Richard was presented to the Grand Duke in Florence (with others including Thomas Orde and Sir John Rous).2 William Young, who was in Naples from September to December, refered to Neville as 'my Camarade de Voyage' and they visited Paestum together (Young later giving Neville some of the drawings he made there).3 William Hervey also made several excursions from Naples with Neville between December 1772 and February 1773, with Thomas Orde and Mrs [Penelope] Pitt. On 15 February in Rome, Hervey joined Neville, Orde and John Staples on one of James Byres's courses of antiquities.4 A Neville manuscript diary5 records a visit to the Villa Borghese and the Villa Albani in Rome in 1773. Neville sat to Batoni, the portrait dated Rome 1773 (High Museum, Atlanta; Clark/Bowron 364), and he has been identified, along with Byres, Staples, Young and Orde, in a conversation piece attributed to Wickstead painted at Rome c.1773 (Springhill, Ulster, and Audley End).6 He was possibly the Mr Neville mentioned by Lord Winchilsea at Rome in April 1771.7
On qualifying as a doctor of medicine, Neville made the grand tour, setting out from Harwich with Dr John Gifford, a difficult companion, in October 1777.1 They spent time in Holland and France, before reaching Rome late in June 1778. They stayed there over a year; Orazio Orlandi, 'recommended as the first Antiquary in Rome', acted as their cicerone, but Neville became tired with a lack of company. Gifford died in Tivoli on 7 August 1779, and on 6 September Neville set out for Naples.  He found Sir William and Lady Hamilton 'very agreeable'; he visited Pompeii and Herculaneum, taking copious notes. On 30 November he returned to Rome, visiting Thomas Jenkins that day to see his antiquities. Jenkins was particularly helpful to Neville in the matter of Gifford's burial and estate. In February 1780 Neville met John Soane, 'a very ingenious young architect', taking him in his coach to see the Corso, and together they met Jacob More. Neville also called on Nathaniel Marchant, but he did not indulge in patronage. At the end of his tour he appears to have had only two small marbles from a temple at Herculaneum and some geological specimens, which Jenkins undertook to send back to England.  He left Rome early in March (his passport to Venice was dated 3 March 1780), travelling with a servant, Domenico Servi, who was dismissed in Venice as he had no German. Neville spent 'some months' in Venice, where he met the British resident, John Strange (with whom he was corresponding from Norwich in 1784). Neville was issued with a passport for travel through Germany dated Venice, 18 May 1780. He returned to Margate in late August/early September that year.
Neville attended the dinner given in Florence on 21 October 1768 to mark Horace Mann's investiture with the Order of the Bath.1 By April 1769 he was in Rome having visited Naples where he had met Lord Fortrose; as a result Neville had become 'stark raving after cameos & intaglios. Not only every day but every hour is adding to his collection' Humphrey Morice told William Hamilton.2
For his first tour of Italy as Thomas Wynn, see James Grant of Castle Grant. In 1782, as Lord Newborough, heavily in debt through his obsession with fortifications and the Caernarvon Militia, he went off to Italy with his ten-year-old son John (1772- 1800, m. 1793 Lena Vanderdauky) and, apparently, his wife. But Catherine, Lady Newborough, died on 30 April 1782, at the age of thirty-two, and was buried in the Leghorn cemetery.1 Newborough's behaviour in Italy became eccentric. In February 1786 Horace Mann reported that not only had the son been allowed to run wild, but the father, who had 'resided here in a very obscure manner since 1782' was to marry an Italian 'singing-girl about 13 years old, the daughter of a sbirro'. She was Stella Chiappini, who found him a stout 'old grey-beard, from behind whose few and discoloured teeth came forth an offensive breath' and very poor Italian; but they were married in S.Maria Novella on 10 October, the infatuated Newborough describing his wife as 'the Marchesina of Modigliana, niece to the late General Chiappini'. Their married life was predictably unsettled, and Newborough attracted the attention of John, Lord Hervey (who had succeeded Horace Mann as resident in 1788), with complaints against his wife's family. In July 1790 Elizabeth Gibbes attended a dinner at Lord Hervey's and described Lady Newborough as 'wilder than a colt'.2 Meanwhile her husband was corresponding (in October 1790) with the printer Bodoni in Parma over an Italian translation of Hurd's Dialogues on the use of Foreign Travel (and again in March 1792 from The Hague).3 Following allegations by his father-in-law, Newborough was arrested for debt, to be released at the end of 1791 when his agent, Samuel Price, came out from Wales to settle his accounts. 'Lord Newborough, after all the various difficulties which he had encountered in this country for this last six years past is at last gone from Florence', wrote Lord Hervey on 20 December 1791.  Newborough was in Holland in March 1792, his composure evidently recovered; Stella eventually gave him two sons, born in 1802 and 1803.4 In 1799 Lorenzo Chiappini, Lady Newborough's father, was in prison in Florence for alleged Jacobinism; William Wyndham, the British minister, was asked to take an interest in his case, but he advised that since Chiappini was 'a principal Constable or thief-taker, whose character has been marked by infamy and disloyalty', no action was required.5

Francis Parker (as he was born) assumed the name of Newdigate from his mother, who was the cousin of the antiquary and traveller Sir Roger Newdigate. Sir Roger was also Francis's mentor and ultimately his benefactor (following the death of Francis's younger brother, Charles).  In 1793, when he was past forty, Francis Newdigate went to Italy with his wife, a niece, Miss Parker, and a Mr Dalnay. In the course of his tour he made several purchases for Sir Roger, a summary list of which survives among the Newdigate papers. Most of their time was spent in the Venezia. They took a house at Treviso but, it appears, frequently visited Venice. On 16 August 1793 'Francesco Nattidag', conceivably Newdigate, spent a day in Venice; 'Fran:co Biudiget' was in Venice with his wife and son on 6 February 1794, and on 5 November 1794 'Siga Palier Nobile Inglese' [presumably Miss Parker] came to Venice from Florence with the Newdigates and Mr Dalnay ('tutti parenti'); the same group again visited Venice for three days on 3 February 1795, coming from Treviso, 'ove son stabiliti'. Their last visits to Venice were on 3-4 April and 14-16 May 1795.1  From Florence in July 1793 the Newdigates and Miss Parker were introduced to Sir William Hamilton in Naples, the letter stating that 'Mrs Newdigate's Niece is a charming young woman & very fitt to be a Model for the Sculptors of futur times'.2 They spent some time in Naples, where they met Lady Templetown in the summer of 1794; on 20 September 1794 she told Sir Roger Newdigate she had wished to detain them.3
The two tours of Italy made by Sir Roger Newdigate are documented by a quantity of drawings and carefully written records (Newdigate MSS). These papers are supplemented by letters from his nephew Charles Parker in Italy and Sicily in 1782-4 and a less detailed account of purchases made for Sir Roger by his heir Francis Parker Newdigate in Italy in 1793. Together these documents furnish a remarkable grand tour archive. In Sir Roger's obituary notice1 it was observed that 'He made a point of delineating what had not before been published'. He was among the most accurate as well as the most comprehensive recorders of the ancient ruins, and his illustrations of the Via Appia Antica in particular are notable for the independence of his approach and the fortuitous manner in which the drawings of 1740 anticipate, in style and subject, the manner of Piranesi. His correspondence shows also his desire to extend the range of grand tour studies. In 1752 he received the earliest account in English of the Greek temples at Paestum, and the first notice of the work of James Stuart and Nicholas Revett at Pola. In 1776 he was urging John Strange, British resident at Venice, to have the Society of Antiquaries of London publish a survey of the Roman monuments of France. In 1783 Charles Parker sent him written and visual accounts of the ancient sites of Sicily.2  Sir Roger also distinguished himself by his patronage of Piranesi, from whom he acquired for Oxford University a pair of candelabra (Ashmolean Museum) and twelve bound volumes of prints of the master, a duplicate of the set bought for himself. Piranesi repaid the compliment by adding to his collection of 1748, Archi antichi, a print of the Roman Arch at Aosta disegnato dal Cav. Rug. Newdigate Inglese. Sir Roger had made the first careful survey of the Roman remains there.3 His collecting was mainly of books and prints, with some drawings by artists working in Italy and smaller paintings, mostly topographical and assembled for study rather than display. He did not seek original old masters, but commissioned copies (particularly after Raphael) and he also acquired casts of statuary. He was keenly interested in the display of works of art and his diagrams and notes on the public and private collections in Italy are the most informative available. To him is due the earliest and fullest account (made late in 1739), generously illustrated, of the holdings of the Uffizi, while his correspondence with Charles Parker provides a well-documented account of subsequent changes observed in 1782.4 For the Roman collections his records of the sculpture galleries are more complete than those of the picture galleries. Between his Italian tours Sir Roger maintained close acquaintance with Italian affairs through correspondence with younger tourists, most notably Lascelles Raymond Iremonger, and through the sculptor he patronised in London, Richard Hayward. His predilection for the display of statuary in Italy had practical results in 1755, when Lady Pomfret used him as intermediary to donate to Oxford University (for which Newdigate was MP 1750-80) the Arundel Marbles, first housed in accordance with his plans for them, in the Old Schools. Their disposition was his major preoccupation in his final years, when he sought to have them removed, under the care of John Flaxman, to the Radcliffe Library, a scheme for which he donated £2,000, but whose fulfilment was thwarted by his death on 23 November 1806.
In 1779 Newenham attended the Maundy Thursday ceremony in the Sistine Chapel at which the Bishop of Derry 'in his English bishop's dress' was relegated to the lowest part of the chapel, while Newenham and his sons remained in the upper division with the Cardinals (Childe-Pemberton, 1:230).

A number of references to a lady travelling in the Veneto in 1793-6 possibly describe the Mrs Newnham who escorted Admiral William Hotham in Italy 1795-6. 'Madama Newham e Monsieur Pensons inglesi' were in Venice on 18 February 1791; the 'Madama Neuvkam / Newkham Inglese' in Venice in 1793 and 17941 was possibly the Mrs Newenham in Leghorn in January 1795,2 as well as the Mrs Newnham who came to Florence with 'Peerson' from Venice in May 1796 and the 'Madama Nachunchem / Nunham / Niuchant' travelling in the Veneto in June 1796.3
Newport was in Padua on 18 October 1704 with William Pulteney,1 and the Duke of Shrewsbury saw them together in Rome on 24 February 1705,2 after which they apparently separated.

They were listed in Naples on 18 January 1787,1 and arrived in Venice on 28 April.2
With his tutor David Mallet, Newsham arrived in Venice from Vienna in October 1735.1 They were in Naples on 10 June 1737 when Billy Bristow [W.B.] wrote that 'le jeune Newsham, qui est fort de mes amis' was then concerned over his mother's remarriage as was 'le poéte Mallet, qui voyage en compagnon avec luy'.2

Appointed British envoy in Tuscany in 1704, Newton arrived in Venice, from Germany, on 13 March 17051 and was in Padua on the 17th.2 On 1 May he was in Florence.3 One of his earliest tasks was to protect the appointment of a Protestant chaplain for the English merchant colony at Leghorn, which had aroused Papal opposition. Newton remonstrated with the Grand Duke in Florence and only a threat from London of armed intervention resolved the situation. The first chaplain, Basil Kennett, arrived in December 1706 and officiated in Newton's house.  In 1706 Newton was sent on a special mission as envoy extraordinary to Genoa, in order that he might ascertain the neutrality of that state during the Spanish wars. He arrived on 19 September and stayed until 19 June 1707. He was again in Genoa in December 1707 but, though he remained envoy extraordinary, he apparently returned only once more to the city to take his formal leave, arriving on 8 April 1711 and departing on 17 May.4  A diplomat noted for his urbanity and eloquence (DNB), who once advocated the formation of a league of Italian Princes to 'liberate' Italy,5 Newton also maintained cultural and antiquarian interests. In 1710 he published in Amsterdam his Orationes (delivered in Florence 1705 and Genoa 1707) and, in Lucca, the Epistolae, Orationes et Carmina, a volume dedicated to his lifelong Oxford friend, Lord Somers. For him, Newton negotiated the dispatch of two cases of pictures from Leghorn, the bill dated 29 June 1707, and he was later instrumental in the purchase of some twenty volumes of drawings from the Resta collection which he brought back to England for Somers in 1711.6 This collection was discussed by Newton with John Talman, one of several distinguished antiquarians with whom he became particularly friendly;7 others included Ficoroni8 and Magliabecchi. Newton maintained a correspondence with Pope Clement XI and was made a member of the Accademia della Crusca (DNB). He sat to William Aikman in 17109 and his medallion portrait was cast by Soldani in 1709 (example with Heim in 1966); in 1711 he obtained permission from the Grand Duke for Soldani to make four copies in bronze of antique statues, including the Medici Venus and Dancing Faun, for the Duke of Marlborough.10  On 1 March 1711 Newton returned to Florence from Rome, where he had gone 'towards the latter end of the Carneval', and he took his official leave from the Tuscan court on 11/12 March 1711 (John Molesworth succeeding him on 20 March).11 He was in Turin on 23 May,12 and in Mantua on 5 June, when he wrote to Kennett 'tomorrow I am for Verona & so farewell to faire Italy'.8
In October 1711 'Sir John Newton's son', Carr, Lord Hervey, and Charles Hotham were with Henry, Lord Herbert (later 9th Earl of Pembroke), in Turin.1 Michael Newton was in Padua on 11 January 17122 and on the 15th was recorded in Venice with Hervey.3 At the end of October 1712 he left Rome with Lord Herbert,4 and they were in Venice in July 1713 with Hugh Bethel and James Dalrymple.5

Newton arrived in Rome at the same time as William Marlow in February 1766 and he was ordering chimneypieces in Rome that year.1 He had returned to London by 3 April 1767, when he sent a design for a chimneypiece 'to be done at Carrara' (RIBA) to a Signor Conte del Medico at Carrara, requesting an estimate for its construction.2 Soon after his return Newton began his translation of Vitruvius.
Miss Newton heard of her father's death when she was in Naples in November 1763.1 On 7 January 1764 she was dining in Naples with the Garricks, Lady Orford and others,2 and was presumably the 'Newton' in Capua on 5 May 1764 going to Rome.3 She may also have been the 'Newton' with whom Garrick's dismissed Neapolitan servant was in Milan in 1764.4

Mr Niccols, an ingenious friend of Mr [Thomas] Gray', arrived in Milan in October 1771.1 Bad weather held him there through the winter. He wrote from Bologna on 1 March describing his visit to Parma on 25-26 February. On 15 March he reached Florence where he dined out every day, attended concerts and was, of course, courteously received by Horace Mann.2 He intended to be in Rome for Sunday, 12 April, the beginning of Holy Week. On 13 May he was in Capua with Lord Findlater,3 and on the 23rd they arrived in Naples. Nicholls found it hard to imitate his Lordship's style, but appears to have stayed with him some time. In October he was in Rome where Patrick Home saw him looking at Raphael's Fire in the Borgo with James Byres.4 Nicholls pointed out that a course with Byres cost 15 guineas and a half-length portrait by Batoni cost 20. On 27 October he arrived with Findlater in Venice5 and the following month went on his own to Milan. He returned home the following year. Patrick Home had described Nicholls as 'a spruce English parson - plays the Cavalier abroad,'6 and the fact that he had had to borrow money from Findlater in Naples and Venice, and from Byres in Rome, suggests his reach exceeded his grasp.




Mr Nightngale Corriere Inglese' passed through Verona on his way from Milan on 29 November 1795.1 On 3 May 1796 a Mr Nightingale, travelling with J.B.S. Morritt from Ferrara to Venice, stayed in Padua;2 Anthony and John Nightingale were in Rovigo on 19 June.3
Nightingale was in Italy with his son, Washington, and daughter, Elizabeth. They were in Florence from August to October, when they left for Rome, accompanied by Nightingale's sister-in-law, Lady Kilmorey, and her husband (Wal.Corr., 20:271, 278).
Serving under his step-father, Horatio Nelson, Nisbet was twice in Naples, in September 1793 and September 1798. On the second occasion Nelson told his wife, Josiah's mother, that Lady [Emma] Hamilton had made great improvements in Josiah: 'I love him dearly with all his roughness' (J. Marshall, Royal Naval Biography, 2:187. Fothergill 1969, 268, 316).
William Nisbet was with Lord Findlater and a Mr Casa Major ('a low bred - dull, impertinent, meddling Fellow') in the Borghese Palace on 30 April 1772.1 He subsequently purchased paintings from the Mattei collection in Rome in 1802.2
Following the failure of the Jacobite rising in Scotland, Lord Nithsdale, Catholic and Jacobite, had been attainted and condemned to death, but he was rescued from the scaffold by his wife and Michele Vezzosi, a servant to the Venetian ambassador in London, and escaped to France in 1716. He came to the exiled Jacobite court at Pesaro in April 17171 and stayed in Italy until his death. In 1717 he lodged in Rome with Charles Wogan and a Mr Cameron, and he was in Urbino in March 1718.2  His Countess, whose mother had nursed the infant Pretender, was herself a personal friend of Queen Mary of Modena, and she was at La Flèche from January to June 1718, begging the Pretender for a place in his Court when he was married.3 On the death of Mary of Modena in May 1718 Lady Nithsdale brought some of her jewellery from Paris to the Pretender at Urbino (GEC). She was in Rome with the Countess of Mar when the Pretender married the Princess Clementina Sobieska in 1719, and became governess to the Stuart Princes in 1725 and 1727.4 In July 1727 she brought Clementina from her convent to Rome,5 and Lord Nithsdale, who had been made a Knight of the Thistle by the Pretender in 1725, was then appointed the Princess's lord in waiting.6 Both Nithsdales were pensioners of the Jacobite court.7 In May 1727 their son William (Lord Maxwell) and daughter Lady Anne (see John, Baron Bellew) joined them in Italy, but Maxwell left Rome in June.8 In May 1736 Stosch said the Nithsdales had gone to live in Naples,9 but on 14 November 1736 Alexander Cunyngham [later Sir Alexander Dick] observed in the Jesuits Church in Rome 'the Chevalier and my Lord Nithsdale very piously employed at their devotions'.10 In Rome in 1741 Lady Pomfret saw Lady Nithsdale 'now grown very old': she appeared nevertheless 'a woman of quality, and is in great esteem here: yet I was told that that since the death of her daughter, Lady Bellew [in 1735], she seldom goes out, except to Church'.11 Both the Nithsdales died in Rome, he in 1744 and she in 1749.



In October 1750 Mr and Mrs Noble were 'in a good way' at Naples, where they received £5 from 'Dr Pocock' (an Irish friend, doubtless Richard Pococke);1 they were possibly related to the banking Nobles, see below.
A banker at Naples, Noble is mentioned between September 1786 and September 1799.1 Mr Noble and Edmund Noble of Naples subscribed to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave in 1790.

Noel was in Verona with Edward Clarke in November 17311 and went on to Venice for the Carnival. On 3 March 1732 he left for Rome with Lord Middlesex, Lord Robert Montagu, Sewallis Shirley, and others.2 They were together in Florence by 15 July3 (and Noel may have meanwhile travelled to Rome and Naples with them, see Middlesex).


Nollekens spent nine years in Rome where, besides making a fair fortune through restoration and dealing, he acquired a reputation as a skillful portraitist. He had set out in 1761 (J.T. Smith mistakenly wrote 1760).1 On 21 May he had received in person the last and greatest of his five prizes from the Society of Arts, and having won in all £123.18s he was able to travel 'to see the works of Michel Angelo, and of other great men'. He must also have had the encouragement of his master Scheemakers to study the antique. Hayward noted his arrival at Rome 'with Jiacomo Freys son' on 11 August 17612 and a droll account of the journey out survives in a copy of a letter written to Thomas Banks.3 James 'Athenian' Stuart looked after Nollekens's interests in London, and must have given him introductions and advice on living and working in Rome. Probably he had always intended to remain several years. In 1764 he was working in the studio of Cavaceppi, where he learnt to restore and counterfeit the antique. Through Gavin Hamilton he came into contact with English tourists, and in particular with a party for whom in 1764 he carved several versions of Cavaceppi's marble group, the Boy on a Dolphin (Hermitage, St Petersburg).4 The finest copy was made for the 9th Earl of Exeter, full-size on a candelabrum base (Burleigh House) and half-size versions were made for Lord Spencer (Althorp) and Viscount Palmerston (Broadlands); David Garrick had one in terracotta (Garrick sale). Not all are documented, and another half-size marble at Ickworth is likely to be by Nollekens.  When sketching in the Vatican in the spring of 1764, Nollekens was recognised by David Garrick, who then commissioned the first portrait head he modelled (marble version, Althorp). Other portraits followed; on 9 July 1764 James Martin saw several, including busts of the Duke of York (Windsor Castle), John Wodehouse and a Mr Richards.5 A few other Rome portraits are known, of Laurence Sterne (terracotta exhibited London 1767, lost; early marble version, NPG); the 5th Earl of Carlisle (1768, Castle Howard) and the excellent head of J.B. Piranesi (Accademia di S.Luca, Rome).6 Other dilettanti collectors whom Nollekens knew at Rome, and who later became his patrons in England, included Lord Holland, Charles Pelham (Lord Yarborough), Sir Watkin Williams Wynn and Charles Townley (a collection of terracottas, which Nollekens bought cheaply at Rome and later sold to Townley, is in the BM).  In August 1764 James Stuart informed Thomas Anson of Shugborough that Nollekens was starting on his marble copy of the San Ildefonso group, Castor and Pollux; the finished work is dated 1767 (VAM). Nollekens told Stuart what antiquities, and so on, were available for Anson to buy,7 and sent drawings, of which some are preserved at the RIBA. He dealt in antiques to an appreciable extent, and he exported antiquities from Rome on five occasions between 1765 and 1770.8 By 1764 he was buying from the Palazzo Barberini.9 In partnership with Thomas Jenkins, he restored the Barberini Venus which was then sold to William Weddell for £1,000 (Newby Hall). Lord Exeter bought a fine Niobe bust (Brocklesby). Nollekens also owned a sacrificial relief, sold to Catherine the Great (Hermitage, St Petersburg) and statues of an Athlete and Hygeia.10 A copy of the Rondanini Medusa by Nollekens is at Burleigh and terracotta statuettes at Burleigh and Althorp, besides a few antiquities, were apparently supplied by him.  Through Gavin Hamilton, no doubt, Nollekens knew the Villa Albani circle. But, as Smith implies, he was as ignorant of the merits of that company as he was of the history of art, and his Rome reminiscences were few and frivolous. As a Catholic, but neglectful of his duties, he escaped censure through the patronage of the Cardinal. Nollekens pursued an industrious, miserly and squalid way of life. We do not hear much of his friendships with other British artists, except with the perfidious James Barry - though he was evidently close to the landscape painter James Forrester, with whom he shared rooms in the Via Babuino from 1765 until his departure.11 In 1769 they embarked together on a three-week excursion into the country, with a number of other artists, see Forrester.  In 1768 he won a gold medal in the concorso Balestra with a model of Jupiter, Juno and Io (the four prizewinning sculptors included Vincenzo Pacetti).12 A half-length oil portrait made at Rome shows Nollekens modelling his Faun (YCBA) and has been (perhaps doubtfully) attributed to Barry;13 the clay faun depicted is the maquette for a Bacchus based on Michelangelo's statue, which was exhibited at the RA 1771 and 1772 and carved in marble for Thomas Anson (untraced). Other works most likely modelled at Rome include two small terracottas, Petus and Arria (Sackler Collection, New York) and Juno Pronuba (VAM). Nollekens had learnt to draw fluently, and during his nine years abroad he constantly made studies of works of art (as Scheemakers had done earlier), copying ancient and modern sculpture, reliefs and details, and figures from paintings. At his posthumous sale of prints and drawings (Evans, 5 Dec. 1823), a number of sketchbooks and loose sheets were dispersed, citing locations (sometimes inscribed) as the Vatican, Palazzi Giustiniani and Massimi, Villa Borghese, Frascati, Tivoli, Loreto, Mantua and Bologna. The surviving drawings also indicate the Villa Albani and Villa Negroni, and Florence. There are miscellaneous Italian drawings at the VAM and the Soane Museum; some 175 loose drawings in a private collection, New York, and two complete sketchbooks at the Ashmolean Museum. The earlier of these (c.1765-8) contains chiefly heads, some drawn at the French Academy, and the second sketchbook has ten original studies for funeral monuments, followed by modern sculpture at Rome and Genoa, and then at Vienna and Paris on the journey home. Also at the Ashmolean Museum there are measured drawings of the Laocoon, Capitoline Antinous, and the Medici Venus (dated June 1770). In June 1770 he was made a member of the Academy at Florence. On 29 September Father Thorpe wrote that he was going 'next week for London'.14 His baggage was considerable, with antiquities and casts for study or for sale, paintings, books and (probably) some cinquecento terracottas, about which Smith concedes he was quite well informed. He had also acquired a set of the extremely rare engravings by Marcantonio, I Modi, which later his confessor obliged him to destroy.15 His Italian years had confirmed Nollekens in his preference for cinquecento sculpture, particularly for Giovanni Bologna whose style generally he was to imitate in ideal statues. But his lasting reputation was to be in portrait busts, in which his style remained based principally on the antique, which he had learnt with Cavaceppi. His first-hand knowlege of the antique was of considerable value, and his opinion of ancient statues was often sought by collectors such as Charles Townley and Lord Bessborough.

The Duke of Norfolk was in Genoa in August 1702, attended by two Genoese noblemen,1 and was next recorded in Italy with his brother the Abbate Richard Howard, arriving in Rome on 18 October 1703. Early in November 1703 he received a Papal audience; wearing hat and sword as a Catholic nobleman, he was accorded 'all the honours paid to dukes and peers of France and grandees of Spain'.2 He was refused permission to visit Naples the following spring (during the War of the Spanish Succession) because, he believed, 'he had visited the Emp[eror's] Ambassador to Leghorn, and gone aboard the Eng[lish] fleet'.3 The Duke was listed as staying near the Strada della Croce in Rome at Easter 1704,4 but the brothers had left Rome on 1 April and were in Padua on the 27th.5 On 2 May the Duke and 'The Abbate his brother', were in Venice for Ascension.6 The Duke left within a week, and on 21 June he embarked at Genoa for Toulouse.7 He returned to northern Italy in the winter of 1730-1, now married to a staunch Jacobite, Maria Shireburn who, it was said, had left him when he declared his support for the Hanoverians (in 1722 he had been arrested for alleged complicity in a Jacobite plot). In these circumstances he was not anxious to go to Rome, 'which he may fear would give some Umbrage at home'.8 He arrived in Venice on 2 December 1730 with 'a young Gentleman' called Southcot, travelling 'at as small an expence as is possible', which, commented Elizeus Burges, 'is ye more taken notice of, because we have lately had several private Gentlemen throw their money away very lavishly'.8 Norfolk left Venice towards the end of January and went to Milan, 'where he proposes to stay only four daies, and then goes on to Turin, where he will see ye end of ye Carnaval & spend all ye Lent, & designs to be home in ye month of June'.9




Ecclesiastical preferment had come easily to Brownlow North through his half-brother, the prime minister, Lord North. When he was fifty, and had been ten years Bishop of Winchester, he went to Italy where he spent five years, harrassed by his difficult and invalid wife (an heiress). With their six daughters, son and seven servants, they were staying in Venice from 6 to 31 December 1791.1 They were in Florence by June2 and in November set off for Rome, Brand observing that the Bishop had shown great attention to Lord Bruce and that his wife had been 'in a very ill humour'.3  In Rome the Bishop sat to Hugh Robinson, Sarah Bentham seeing the portrait in December 1793.4 In December 1792 he was inspecting Flaxman's drawings and on 17 February 1793 he was with Mrs Flaxman at the Villa Medici.5 By November 1793 they were in Naples, where Mrs North attracted much criticism for setting up rouge et noir tables. Lord Bruce told his father that she had quarrelled terribly with Emma Hamilton and with her husband, and had even asked Sir William Hamilton to draw up 'articles of separation', but alas, wrote Lord Bruce, 'the Bishop's evil stars were ascendant and they are still in conjunction'.6 By April 1794 Mrs North had made 'an immense collection ... [of] cristals, gems, & minerals - whether good or bad I know not', but, wrote Hamilton, 'I dont believe she will return home alive, tho in no immediate danger at this moment'.7 The Bishop too collected 'all kinds of antiquities', including Greek vases.8 On 22 August 1794 they were in Florence being received by the Grand Duke and his Duchess;9 early in September they were in Parma, where the Bishop visited the Bodoni press,10 and on 11 September in Verona.11 From October 1794 to May 1795 they were at Ratisbon, where Betsey Wynne described Mrs North, as a 'very naughty ... tall stiff woman', 'the devil on Earth - and a nasty proud fool. She plagues her husband and Children to death'.12 'Mr North & his colony' left Rome on 30 August 1795 for Corsica.13 Mrs North died in 1796, her monument in Winchester cathedral being completed by Flaxman in 1801.



A 'singular philhellene' and an accomplished linguist, North was in Venice from 4 to 16 December 1790 ('Il Conte Federico North'),1 about to embark on a voyage to the Middle East. At Corfu on 23 January 1791 he was received into the Greek Church (DNB). Eighteen months later, on 3 July 1792 he returned to Rome and he probably returned to England on learning of his father's death which took place on 5 August. He was elected to Parliament in September 1792. After he had been appointed minister in Corsica, North was again in Rome in May and August 1795.2  A manuscript account of a 'Tour from Rome to Sicily, Malta and the Coast of Africa', formerly attributed to Frederick North is now considered to be by G. Graves.3
The 'Fred: North' in Turin on 13 October 1784, who attended a dinner with the Russian Minister on the 16th with Sir James Hall,1 was probably also the 'North' dining with Thomas Jenkins and Lord Grey de Wilton in Rome on 31 March 1785.2
Last week Mr North an Irish gentleman past through [Florence] for Rome & Naples, its sayd on account of his health' (SP 98/35; Florence Newsletter, 19 Jun. 1734).

He was with a Mr Moore in Capua on 1 April 1752,1 but Northall's tour is otherwise known only through his Travels through Italy, dedicated to David Garrick, published posthumously in London in 1766. It was described in the Scott jnl.MSS as 'much a copy of' J.G. Keysler's Travels [1740; transl. 1756].
Lively and good natured with what is called a pretty figure', Charles Compton was in Padua in June 1757, when he had promised Robert Adam 'employment' at Castle Ashby.1 He was in Venice in July,2 and then turned back to Rome. On 5 April 1758 the artist John Parker in Rome told Lord Charlemont that Compton had 'ordered a large history piece to Mr [Gavin] Hamilton' (characteristically adding 'and had he seen my work, I flatter myself I should have been employed too').3 This was the Andromache weeping over the dead body of Hector, one of two remarkable commissions for ambitious classical history pictures which Compton then placed, the other being Hector's Farewell from Batoni, to whom Compton also sat for a whole-length portrait (dated Rome 1758, Clark/Bowron 208; Fitzwilliam Mus.). The history pieces are now untraced, the designs known only through drawings and an engraving,4 and Compton did not live to see them completed. He also commissioned a copy from Francis Harwood of the Venus de Medici, together with seven busts and two full-sized figures.5 In May 1758 he was dallying in Florence, 'so much engag'd that he will scarcely leave',6 but George Lucy was impressed by his manners.7 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu reported him still in Florence on 31 December 1758,8 when he had just succeeded his uncle as 7th Earl of Northampton. He was back in London late in April 1759,9 and on 13 September he married the eighteen-year-old Lady Anne Somerset in London. In May 1761 the Earl of Northampton was appointed ambassador extraordinary to Venice, in return for a Venetian embassy which had come to London to congratulate George III on his accession.10 Etiquette required that Northampton did not make his formal entry until the Venetian embassy had made theirs in London, and there was a considerable delay. When he arrived in Venice with his wife on 17 October 1762 (having come through Turin on 3 October),11 neither was well, and in April 1763 the Countess set out for Naples to recover her health.12 West had painted her portrait in Venice in the character of a Madonna with her young daughter (Lady Elizabeth Compton) in her arms (Bass Museum, Miami Beach). She left Rome on 14 May, passed through Capua on the 16th and reached Naples on the 17th, only to die the next day.13 Not until 29/30 May 1763 was her husband able to make his formal entrance into Venice, and he returned, weak and 'wasted to a skeleton', from the second day's ceremonies only to be told of his wife's death.14 He left Venice on 8 June 1763 and died in Lyons on 18 December.
By the end of 1776, after he had left Reynolds's studio, Northcote recalled that 'the greatest object with me was to visit Italy as soon as possible, in hopes to make myself more able in my profession by seeing and studying the works of ancient masters'.1 He left England in March 1777 and travelled through France. He spent a week in Genoa, where he met Hugh Barron (another ex-pupil of Reynolds), who gave him an introduction to Jacob More in Rome. When Northcote reached Rome on 23 May, Jacob More received him and found him lodgings recently vacated by David Allan on the Strada della Croce, on the third floor 'as none but servants and the meaner sort inhabit the first or second'. In February 1779 he ('Najohet') moved to apartments in the Palazzo Zuccaro, 'the pleasantest part of all Rome' with James Nevay, Alexander Day and the French painter Antoine Lemoine;2 he noticed that his rooms were those used by Joshua Reynolds (13 Feb. 1779).  There were a number of English artists then in Rome, besides the antiquaries, of whom Northcote met Thomas Jenkins, 'a very great man here', within a day of his arrival. He met Maria Hadfield, Thomas Banks, Day and Fuseli, while the painter Prince Hoare became his particular friend. Northcote also spent some time with the young French painter Jacques-Louis David, and on 4 February 1778 he told his brother how, with Day and Prince Hoare, he had visited Mengs who 'lives in vast state, is very conceited and haughty' and had several houses in Rome and Florence. Later, on 11 September, he wrote of the contempt Mengs and Batoni had for each other, adding that Mengs 'is by much more liberal and magnificent'. Northcote also commented on Mengs's self-portrait hanging next to Reynolds's in the Uffizi, 'finished so that you can almost tell the hairs of his beard and Sir Joshua's appears as if it were painted with his fingers'.  Northcote 'employed himself chiefly in making sketches or copying parts from such pictures as I thought would be most useful memorandums.' He spent some time drawing in the evenings at the French Academy, and in September 1778 he was copying Michelangelo in the Sistine Chapel, having earlier been apprehensive about working there since he heard that 'the Pope cannot suffer the smell of oil colours'. He painted 'nothing original at that time, except a few portraits of my particular friends, and one of myself', which Bencivenni Pelli, Director of the Uffizi, had requested from him in the summer of 1778.3 Northcote left three self-portraits in Italy: that for the Uffizi dated 1778, the second painted in Florence in the summer of 1779 (Uffizi) for the Accademia del Disegno (he was elected a member on 27 September 1778), and the third painted in Venice in January-February 1780 for the Accademia Etrusca at Cortona (to which he was elected on 9 August 1779). Northcote was also elected to the Accademia dei Forti at Rome on 4 November 1779. He regretted to his brother that it was impossible to make money by his painting because, he explained, 'those cursed antiquaries' controlled patronage and Italian artists 'work for the meanest trifle' (4 Feb. 1778).  On Christmas Day 1778 Northcote dined with Jenkins 'with a great many young painters' (26 Dec. 1778), and in April 1779 he went to Naples for a month with his English artist friends. He finally left Rome, after two years, in June 1779 with Prince Hoare. They spent 'about three months' in Florence, where they met the singer Anna Storace. On 13 July Northcote applied for permission to copy a Rubens Venus in the Uffizi,4 and he recalled being asked in August by the museum's Director for his place of birth and age, 'which I did as well as I can remember', and whether he used 'the same colours as Sir Joshua, for he had been informed that in a few years Reynolds's picture (presented in 1775) would not be fit to be seen' (2 Aug. 1779). They then spent 'near three weeks' in Bologna, looking at Carraccis and inspecting the body of St Catherine of Bologna (preserved seated in a gilt chair). Northcote copied Correggio's Magdalene in Parma, where they spent a further two months, before going to Venice for the Carnival. At the beginning of March 1780 they left for Padua, Verona, Mantua and thence to Augsburg. On 2 May 1780 they reached Margate.
Not a weak man (according to Horace Walpole) but never noted for sense, he was first in Italy in 1771-2 as Lord Henley. He was probably the 'Enley' who arrived in Florence late in August 1771, the year before he succeeded his father. In April 1772 he was in Florence attending a concert given for the Duke of Gloucester.1 He returned to Italy in 1785 in poor health, with John Willett Payne (DNB). In November 1785 he was in Florence with Willett,2 and in December he was in Rome.3 Willett was received by Cardinal York (DNB) and Northington met the 4th Earl of Bristol. Their paths crossed again in Naples soon after; when Northington saw him lying ill, he exclaimed 'There is the Bishop! when I was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, I had the warrant in my pocket to arrest him for his seditious conduct'.4 In March 1786 Northington was said to have been laid up in Rome with gout for three months, 'the climate disagreeing with him very much'.5 In June 1786 Horace Mann confirmed that Northington 'has long been confined by the gout at Rome'.6 Northington died on his way home in Paris on 5 July, aged 39.
Having been apprenticed in London to P.C. Canot, the landscape engraver, Norton won a premium from the Society of Arts in 1760, in which year he went to Rome.1 In 1762 'Monsiur Norton' was living with James Byres and Colin Morison by the Strada Paolina.2 In 1764 James Martin saw in his Rome studio 'Sevl. Copys by Him of Pictures belonging to Mr Jenkins & some of his own Engraving'.3 In 1766 Norton was engraving plates for James Byres's Etruria, and he etched several plates for the Views of Italy by Peter Stephens published in 1767.  Norton's association with Byres became close; in 1776 he was again living in the same street as Byres; and between 1778-81, 1786-8 and 1790 (the records are incomplete) he was listed at the same address as Byres on the Strada Paolina.2 In 1780 Thomas Jones described him as Byres's partner.4 Between 1768 and 1790 Norton exported works of art from Rome on eleven occasions, principally paintings, both old masters and modern works.5 In 1776 he was returning from England to Italy with Thomas Jones (he was doubtless the 'Nortoan' in Florence on 23 November6), and on their arrival in Rome on 27 November Norton led Jones through 'backlanes and dirty passages' to James Byres; in 1782 Jones corresponded with both Norton and Byres concerning the disposal of his own pictures in Italy.7  There were two portraits of Norton in Byres's house, one by H.D. Hamilton, which had been admired by John Ramsay in 17838 (Christie's, 22 Nov. 1977), and the other by Nathaniel Dance, showing him as a painter (Aberdeen). Norton also appears with the Byres family in the two portrait groups attributed to Smuglewicz (see Byres), and Pichler made a drawing (priv. coll., Rome, 1973)9 of a 'Mr Norton', doubtless intended for a cameo. On 25 March 1788 Norton was said to be going 'in 5 or 6 weeks to London',10 and in November James Irvine said he was setting out from London for Rome in a few days with Norton.11 He was also presumably the Mr Norton who returned from Italy with Byres in July 1790.12 By his marriage in Scotland in 1792 to Janet Moir (sister of Patrick Moir) he became James Byres's nephew.13 In 1797 he wrote to Moir in Rome 'I cannot help feeling very much for a country where I have spent so many happy years and which I look'd upon in some measure as my own'.14
Norton was received at Court in Turin on 17 February 1763, when he was said to be about to leave on his appointment as British minister in Switzerland.1 Norton, 'son of the Attorney-General', was in Turin in July/August 1764,2 and was presumably the Norton who with a Mr Heath entertained Boswell in Turin in January 1765: after the opera 'they carried me into a low room of their inn,' wrote Boswell, 'where they romped with two girls, and gave me a most pitiful supper. This, too, was true English'.3 Norton went on to spend eighteen years as British minister to the Swiss cantons.4

Described as a niece of Sir Fletcher Norton, she came to Rome in 1788 as the companion of the Duchess of Albany,1 who died in Bologna on 17 November 1789. In April 1793 she was living in the household of Cardinal York, 'a well looking extremely well behaved lady of somewhat more than 30', observed Sir William Forbes, who called her 'the Countess Norton'.2 Sarah Bentham, who met her in Rome in February 1794, said 'Madame Norton' had been educated in France.3 In December 1795 she was in Penna, thanking the Cardinal for his benevolence.4

A 'Mr N...tt' travelled with Lord Gardenstone from Pisa to Carrara in October 1787 (Gardenstone, 2:239).
Colonel Nugent, in poor health, came to Florence in May-June 1769 from Turin, Horace Mann being asked to give him a message on his arrival.1 He had arrived in Venice on 4 May 1770.2

Thomas Nugent was a pupil at the Collegio dei Nobili in Parma between 1700 and 1710.1 He was possibly the 'Colonell Nugent' who came to Venice in April 1715 when Hugh Broughton reported that the Senate had granted him 'eighty Ducats per Month and comand of the first Regiment that is Vacant'.2 A General Nugent was governor of the Veronese from 1741 to c.1744.3

Nulty, 'a singular character', spent nearly thirty years in Italy and died in Rome at the age of sixty-two. Though he had set out as an artist, he was not particularly successful, and achieved more as an antiquarian and dealer. It appears he first stayed 'at Venice & other Cities as an itinerant Fan-painter' and that James 'Athenian' Stuart 'was his Associate'.1 This implies a date in the 1740s. It is certain that in January 1751 Thomas Hollis met him in Venice: 'Nulty, I knew first at Venice, where he served as a kind of Antiquary; and afterwards I met him at Rome. I believe him to be very honest, but he is, betwixt ourselves, one of the strangest poorest kind of ingenious men that I ever met with'.2  Nulty was first recorded in Rome living in the Strada Gregoriana from 1752 to 1755. He subsequently took rooms in the same house as Robert Crone, and from 1758 until 1767 was noted as living 'Vicino alli Avignonesi', in the house of Sig. Marmieri, where he probably stayed until 1771. From 1772-3 he was living on the ground floor of the house owned by Giovanni Antonio Mazzoni Scarpinello; during 1774 at the Isola della Purificazione and in 1777 at the Casa Bettolini. In his last year, 1778, he lived on the Vicolo S.Isidoro in rooms on the first and second floors.3 He appears to have spent nearly all his time in Rome, although he accompanied James Grant of Castle Grant from Rome to Florence in the summer of 1760 (when the Abbé Grant, referring to him as 'the little mortal', said that 'Nulty is returned full of accounts of Grant's kindness towards him').4 Nulty may also have been the 'Nult' recorded in Florence on 9 November 1771.5  Little is known of Nulty the artist, but in February 1757 he accompanied Richard Phelps as a draughtsman on an expedition to Sicily (Hayward noting that Mr Nulty was 'Engag'd ... near Gorgenti or Agrigentum', but he was mistaken in saying the visit was made in 1755).6 Nulty's drawing skills, however, fell short, and on 11 February 1758 Robert Mylne told his brother, William, that he was looking for a draughtsman 'to be sent to Sicily very soon to do over again what was done by Nulety'.7 It appears that Nulty may later have tried his hand at sculpture. When Joseph Ceracchi came to England in 1773, he brought with him a letter of introduction 'from Nulty, a sculptor at Rome'.8 He may have been involved in arranging the restoration of excavated antique statuary.  Nulty was perhaps more successful as an antiquarian although, according to Thomas Jones, he lacked 'that oily supple disposition necessary to the Profession' and consequently 'did not find much employment in that Line'.9 Jones further related that Nulty had a patron, an English gentleman whom he had once served as antiquary, who allowed him a small pension 'with which his few wants were easily satisfied'. It was, Jones believed, to this same gentleman that Nulty 'behaved in the following characteristic manner - Having accepted of an Invitation to accompany him & his Lady to England, in his traveling Coach - when they had made about half their journey The Gentleman happened to expiate a little upon the convenience of the Carriage - Old Nulty taking this as an innuendo of the Obligation he was under - order'd the Coach to stop, & out he jump'd - 'Sir says he I have traveld thousands of Miles on foot, and can do it again with more pleasure that in your coach', & notwithstanding all persuations to the Contrary, walked the rest of the way to England'.9 In November 1777 Jones and 'old Nulty the Antiquarian' travelled with Saunders Welch and his daughter by coach from Rome to Tivoli: but, recounted Jones, 'before we came to the bottom of the mountains the Carriage broke down - as I was the person who had had engag'd it, I was under great apprehensions of very severe reflexions on the Occasion from Nulty particularly, as he was of very sarcastic turn', but the 'Old fellow turned it to a joke'; they had to walk the rest of the way, 'The Lady mortified, the Justice grumbling & Nulty & myself making our selves very merry at the adventure'.10 Nulty was more successful as an agent and he made regular shipments of both antique and modern sculpture, vases, mosaic tables and paintings to England between 1 July 1758 and 18 March 1774.11 On 4 May 1772 Patrick Home went 'to Netly to see his gallery as he calls it': he saw a copy of Poussin's Death of Germanicus and a copy of Raphael's Madonna della sedia by Angelica Kauffman.12 In the previous year a bill from Nulty, dated 10 June and listing a Venus and Adonis by Veronese, a large Theseus and Aethra by Salvator Rosa, three landscapes by Poussin, a small Claude Lorrain and a cameo ring, was made out to Mr Edward Walter (who was in Italy with his wife and daughter from 1769 to 1771). The bill is endorsed 'gave him [Nulty] for his kindnesses to us while at Rome and on our journey to Paris, 1771, £180 sterling.'13 Nulty died in Rome on 24 June 1778. According to Jones, after over a fortnight's confinement in bed he 'had the Strength & Resolution enough to crawl to the English Coffee-house' where 'he sat all the Afternoon - drank two half pint Tumblers of rum punch, conversed cheerfully - shook hands with us all round, & bid us adieu for ever - the next day ... he dyed & was buried the night following.'14 Nulty's collection was sold in London in 1783 (Christy & Ansell, 27-28 Mar.), the catalogue describing a 'Capital Valuable Collection of Antique and Modern Marble Statues, Bustos, Cinerary and Ossuary Urns, Basso Relievos, Vases ... Marbles ... Antient and Modern Marbles, ... large Mosaic, ... Marble Tables, a great Variety of fine Roman Bronzes, by Zoffoli, Luigi, &c.'
Lord Nuneham made his grand tour at the age of nineteen with his contemporary, George, Viscount Villiers, whose tutor, William Whitehead (the future poet laureate) attended them both.1 Having spent 'twelve horrid months' in Germany2 they came to Venice in November 1755. They went on to Bologna and Rome, where they arrived in the third week of December. Their apartment in the Casa Guarnieri was below that of Robert Adam, whom they asked to recommend a drawing master. Adam, who dismissed them as 'very young boys', may have suggested Laurent Pêcheux.3 Nuneham and Villiers left Rome on 14 March 1756 for Naples, where they were presented at Court that month.4 They returned to Rome on 7 April and after Holy Week went to Florence, where Horace Mann was exceptionally obliging, although, as Nuneham confided to his sister, 'he is not quite of the turn I like'. They continued their homeward journey through Milan and Turin crossing Mont Cenis in June. In September they were back in England. Beyond the essences, seeds and artificial flowers which he sent to his family, Nuneham appears to have bought little. 'The only thing in the way of virtu of any consequence, that I have bought for myself', he told his sister (10 Feb. 1756), 'is a studio of the antient and modern Marbles; they are in small square pieces, & are to be had of different sizes, mine cost 3 guineas, they make the prettiest tables in the world, for they put them into stone, with an edge of black or white marble round each, & a border of any antique marble you please round the whole so that you may with the list, at once see either the modern or antique marbles of all countreys that Rome was ornamented with'. While his travels in Italy may have developed his taste for the fine arts, it was his time in France which influenced his dress and manner so far 'as almost to disguise the exterior of an Englishman'.5

Mr O'Brien', probably John O'Brien, was in Bologna in August 1717,1 and was among the Jacobites listed in Italy in December 1717.2 John O'Brien was certainly in Bologna in September-October 1717.3 Captain John O'Brien was in Venice on 2 January 1718, en route to Vienna4 and he was probably the 'capt O'Bryen Irlandois' mentioned by Stosch in January 1723 as having come to Rome and visited Civitavecchia with the Jacobites Hay and William Bromley.5 In March 1733 Colonel John O'Brien was 'about the Pretender' in Rome with Sir John O'Brien.6 It has been said that Colonel John O'Brien was appointed Jacobite minister in Paris on 21 July 1733 (Ruvigny), but this was evidently Daniel O'Brien, see Daniel, 1st Earl of Lismore.

O'Brien was ordained in Rome in 1770, and spent the next seven years in Italy, mostly in the north.1 On his second visit he had settled in Cremona by 24 July 1786, when he described himself 'both as a Dominican and as a Dillettante of Architecture'.2 O'Brien entered two architectural competitions at the Academy in Parma: in 1787 a drawing was sent from Cremona for a bishop's palace and in 1789 another of a public granary, but both entries were unsuccessful. He was still in Cremona on 15 June 1789 when he wrote in French to Bodoni enquiring about the competition.3 On 21 September 1798 'Obrien Tommaso, Irlandese Pittore' was elected to the Accademia del Disegno, Florence.4
In 1727 Francis O'Connor, a soldier aged forty, was living with his Irish wife Eleanor on the Via Margutta in Rome, with their son Thomas aged eleven; in 1728 a second son, Charles aged fourteen, was listed.1 Francis was probably the O'Connor who was the Irish governor of the garrison at Civitavecchia, as mentioned by Stosch in 1723 and 1726.2  In 1731 Eleanor was a widow living 'seguita il Vicolo del Carciofolo' with her son Thomas; in 1737, described as a Catholic, she was lodging near the Piazza di Spagna ('verso Propaganda'), and in 1750 'Maria Leonora OKeffe', widow of Francis O'Connor, was listed living 'Seguita la Selciata verso Piazza di Spagna'.3



When Mrs Odell was in Rome in February 1796, the 4th Earl of Bristol was saying he had lost 'his Character for going about with her by being supposed ever to have had an intrigue with so ugly a woman'.1 Mrs Odell was then in Naples; she left hurriedly to avoid the French invasion, but when she got '2 posts from Bologna was told the French were in possession of it, so back she ran to Florence now the worst place of all'. Her maid became alarmed for her own safety but, Lady Berwick observed, 'as she is at the tender and tempting age of 50 I shd think she wd pass unmolested unless indeed she shd meet with something in her situation of life, of the age and taste of Lord Bristol'.1 A Mr Odel/Odell was in the Veneto (Venice, Rovigo and Bassano) with his mother and sister between 4 and 8 July 1796.2



O'Farrell, an officer in the Sardinian service, was serving in Turin where Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) described him in January 1780 as 'a Gentlemanlike kind of young Irishman serving in this Country, I imagine on account of that cursed Religion, in the light dragoons' (Pembroke Papers, 1:396-7, and see 380-1).



A Scottish officer, he was in Italy with the 6th Viscount of Falkland. Stosch noticed them together in Rome in October 1723.1 Ogilvie afterwards published a translation of the Istoria Civile [The Civil History of Naples] in 1729-31.2



Ogle was in Capua on 19 April 1753 with Daniel Malthus and 'Mr Bechigtran'[?], presumably on his way to Rome.1 'Sigr. Cavalier Ogle Inge.' was listed as living in the Strada Paolina, Rome, at Easter that year.2
James Oglethorpe went to Italy to visit his eldest brother Theophilus. In August 1717 he had been serving under Prince Eugene at the capture of Belgrade. By December he had passed through Turin and he was at Leghorn in January 1718. By 22 January he had joined his brother in Rome; Theophilus was 'well satisfied with him', and loved him the more 'because I see he is entirely affectionate to the King [the Pretender]'. The Earl of Mar found him a 'a very pretty youth'. By 12 February he had left Rome to see the Pretender at Urbino; he saw him twice, in the evening, 'so none knows of his having been here but those he trusted with it himself', wrote Mar (HMC Stuart, 5:276, 383, 401, 459, 494; 6:138).
Mr Oglethorpe, Adjutant-General of the Queen's forces' came to Turin in January 1714 with George Berkeley in the retinue of the 3rd Earl of Peterborough.1 He remained in Turin some four years in the course of which, even though he appears to have had an unofficial diplomatic post, he became a Jacobite sympathiser. In January 1715 Thomas Coke said he could make 'nothing at all' of Oglethorpe's position, 'for he is one day Envoy, and the next not, but [he] is a very goodnatur'd man'; the two visited Milan together in March.2 By October 1716 Oglethorpe was working in the Jacobite interest, but the King of Sicily told Lord George Murray that Oglethorpe 'meant very well, [but] it was neither in his nature or power to keep anything secret'.3 There are several references to him being with the Sicilian court in Turin in 1716 and 1717 among the Stuart Papers (HMC Stuart). In December 1717 the Pretender prepared a warrant for making him Baron Oglethorpe, in recognition of his and his father's loyalty, but in April 1718 Oglethorpe thanked the Pretender for the title of Earl, assuring him he would not accept it till it was his pleasure.4 This was probably the cause of Oglethorpe's 'noble blunder' mentioned by the Pretender in April 1718.5 Oglethorpe was probably in Venice in October 1717,6 and was certainly in Rome by January 1718, when he was about to have an audience with the Pope;7 William Kent listed him in Rome on 18 January.8 That same month he met his younger brother, James Edward, in Rome and in April they left for Naples, where they had been 'about a month' on 27 May.9 In February 1718 his sister Fanny, a Jacobite agent in Britain, told the Earl of Mar that Theophilus was to take his youngest brother [James Edward] to Malta.10 One of the last remarks about him in Italy was made by Mar who told the Pretender that Oglethorpe 'is grown yet an odder fellow than I formerly knew him ... I cannot imagine how he gets the money to live as he does'.11
Mrs O'Grady with her four children stayed in Venice during the first week of June 1790.1 They were presumably 'the O'Gradys' whom Elizabeth Gibbes had met in Rome on 21 March and in Florence on 21 May.2

Driven abroad by relentless creditors, O'Hara was in Italy with the sickly Edward Conway in 1784. Mary Berry, who saw them frequently, subsequently (in 1795) became engaged to the General, but they did not marry, see Edward Conway. He was presumably the Captain O'Hara presented at Court in Turin on 3 February 1785 with Thomas Pitt and a Mr Grosvenor.1 O'Hara was again in Italy in 1792 when his company was enjoyed by Lady Malmesbury: 'he is the most agreeable, comical creature in the world', she wrote; 'having been everywhere in Europe, Africa and America, he goes with us to Rome, to my great joy'.2
His portrait by Batoni (Clark/Bowron 261a; Sotheby's, 12 Dec. 1984) bears an inscription saying that he 'died at Rome June 1763 aged 28'. O'Hara was probably travelling for his health and was accompanied by the Scottish doctor Robert Mackinlay. They were in Rome together for the winter of 1762-3 and were noticed there in March 1763. After his death a sale of his 'fine Collection of Capital Italian pictures .. which he personally and judiciously chose in the city of Rome and other parts of Italy' took place in Dublin in December 1771 (Faulkner's Dublin Jnl., 10-13 Dec. 1771).

Eager to serve the Pretender in Rome, he was sent on from Urbino by the Earl of Mar who commended his family as 'dutiful and zealous for the King' (HMC Stuart, 6:151).
A secular priest in Naples, on 19 September 1786 he was introduced to Peter Cowling, who found him 'a pleasant intelligent well inform'd Man, he was educated at Prague & Convers'd very well upon History Ancient & Modern'.1 'Padre Giacinto OKully Irlandese Ministro Riformato' came to Venice from Rome on 27 January 1797.2

The loyalest of Jacobites, Oliphant's health had been broken by the hardships he suffered after Culloden. 'Asthma and its attendant made me often suffer', he wrote in October 1768; 'I thought of Naples for health, approved by my Mother, next day money got without difficulty, with my wife sett out the 22nd.'1 In a letter from Rome of 13 January 1769 thanking William Hamilton at Naples for his (presumably anticipated) kindnesses to the Oliphants, the Abbé Grant said 'I am afraid poor gentleman his health will mend but slowly'2 The Oliphants were in Naples by Easter 1769 when Mrs Oliphant described how 'all the town wore black the 3 last days of lent and yet were very fine'. A second letter from Mrs Oliphant, dated Naples, 4 February 1770, described their circumspect life: they had been out twice, to the opera on the King's birthday and to a private ball at William Hamilton's 'where we had Minuets Country dances Reels and Straspeys' but, she added, 'Mr Oliphant and I keep the best hours of any in Naples which is necessary, their's being very late'. They returned to Rome where they twice dined with the Young Pretender who told them of his troubles, while they advocated he should take a Protestant bride. On 16 April 1770 they set out from Rome, leaving Italy through Venice and Turin. By 10 July they were back at Gask, Oliphant noting he had had 'no asthma worth mentioning since Rome'.
Oliphant was noticed in Naples by Lord Gardenstone as one of several young heirs of distinguished British families 'who by their sense and good manners do credit to themselves and honour to their country' (Gardenstone, 3:122).

Grand curieux de peinture et de toutes les beaux arts', Silver Oliver was in Venice in October 1757 when Zanetti gave him a letter to take to the 4th Earl of Carlisle in England.1 On 17 July 1757 'Mr Alver Oliver' had arrived in Venice with 'mr Tomas Lau'[?].2  He was possibly the 'William Oliver' at Padua in November 1755, who had matriculated at Padua University and had previously studied at Alban Hall, Oxford; he returned to Padua on 16 June 1757.3 He may also have been the Mr Oliver in Rome in March 1756; a Mr Hamilton then left Florence with the intention of returning from Rome with him.4
Your friend Mr Oliver has been to offer his services very politely', Thomas Caulet told his sister from Florence on 14 November 1778.1 On 12 January 1779 Horace Mann thanked William Hamilton for his kind reception of 'Oliver' in Naples.2
The brothers Herman and John Olmius were together in Padua on 9 March 1703,1 and were presumably the 'two Mr Ulmes with their Governor' seen by the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome on 19 May.2



An Irishman with a numerous family living in Naples from January 1780; in April 1783 and January 1787 he resisted being evicted from his apartment in the Via Toledo owned by the Convento di S.Spirito (ASN E 683-4).

Orde had travelled in France and Switzerland in 1772, and part of his Italian journal survives for November 1772 (Orde jnl.MSS). Largely devoted to discussing works of art, it also contains general descriptions of some interest. He noticed the bad Italian spoken in Bologna and admired the 'romantic and pleasing' country between Bologna and Florence, a journey he made overnight, stopping only to inspect the volcano of Pietra Mala. Orde was somewhat disappointed with Florence 'and particularly in the buildings'. He stayed at Carlo's [Hadfield's] with some twenty other Englishmen; 'every day fifteen or sixteen dine together', and the English set the tone for dress, besides sponsoring the opera. Horace Mann was 'wonderfully civil', but Lord Cowper 'who has been so long establish'd here, is, I as I understand, not so civil to his Countrymen'. Orde was presented at Court (with John Corbet, William Hervey, Richard Neville, Sir John Rous and John Chetwynd Talbot) and was struck by the incongruity of the splendid palace and the Grand Duke's 'doing all in his power to lessen luxury by discrediting it'. The Grand Duke [Leopold I] was 'a thin lively looking young man, rather wanting dignity in his person' who 'talked French to us very affably'. He was very anxious to embellish his city, and talked of 'so many works, that it is probable, he will perfect none'; the Uffizi was still being repaired after the fire [of 12 August 1762], roads were under construction and the Chapel of S.Lorenzo [Sagrestia Nuova] was being completed. Orde also reflected upon the 'violent excess of a certain unnatural vice' in Florence, which the police were trying to regulate, without effect. In the galleries he was critical of the restoration of The Family of Niobe, recently arrived from Rome; most of the figures 'have been much broke, and I do not like the manner in which they have restored the Niobe herself'. But he was pleased with the recent washing of the Venus de Medici, 'which operation has succeeded well - as it has only taken off the dirt, and still left the softening coat of antiquity'. Orde also described the apartments under the Uffizi for the workmen 'who copy pictures, engrave, take casts of statues &c., inlay marbles and paint in mosaic'. He was probably the Mr Ord seen by William Hervey in Naples during the winter of 1772-3.1 His surviving journal makes clear that Orde had intended to return to Bologna and Florence the following spring, but he was then in Rome. Orde was in Capua on 1 March 1773, going to or from Naples, with William Macdowall and a Mr Barre2 and his name occurs in Townley's accounts in Rome on 13 March and 10 April.3 Lord Hyde also saw him in Rome before the end of April 1773.4 He sat to Batoni for a half-length portrait dated 1773 (Clark/ Bowron 366; priv. coll.) and he also appears in a conversation piece attributed to Wickstead painted at Rome c.1773 with James Byres, Richard Neville, John Staples and William Young (Springhill, Ulster, and Audley End).5 In 1774 he was travelling in Flanders, Holland and Switzerland.6
The O'Reillys had been in Rome for the winter of 1777-8 and Mrs Frederick Hervey met them in Castel Gandolfo in May. She thought they were in distressed circumstances since Mrs O'Reilly had no attendants and seemed dejected, while her husband had three servants (two of whom played the French horn) and spent the winter 'eating, drinking and laughing like a true Irishman, with all their native unembarrassment.' But that summer O'Reilly died from a fever, unregretted by Mrs Hervey (Childe-Pemberton, 1:201-2, 214).
O'Reilly, a gentleman of family and fortune in Ireland who had been three years on his travels, was introduced to Horace Mann by a letter from Langlois in Vienna written in April 1769 (SP 105/319, f.470).
The intemperate nephew of Horace Walpole, Lord Orford was twice in Italy; Lord Warkworth wrote that he was expected at Naples in November 1761,1 and he left Rome on 13 April 1782.2
A strong-minded, free-thinking woman with intellectual pretensions, on bad terms with her husband and the Walpole family, Lady Orford lived on the Continent from 1733 and spent some thirty-six years in Italy. 'I am told', wrote Brinley Skinner (as she prepared to leave Bologna for Rome in November 1733), 'her ladyship receives great benefit by travelling'.1  During her first residence in Italy (as Lady Walpole), from 1733 to 1745, her independence attracted much comment. In Florence in August 1735 she gave 'heartily into all the diversions and customs of the Italians' and was 'so great an admirer of their language that even with people of her own country she never makes use of a word of any other'.2 Two years later she was still ignoring her compatriots, speaking Italian, learning Latin and playing 'la scavante. On dit que ce sera une seconde Reine Christine'.3 She is said to have solicited men,4 and a Neapolitan castrato, an English vicar, an Italian intellectual and an Austrian diplomat were her successive companions. Edward Allen, the British consul in Naples was embarrassed by 'the full fury of her passion' for the Rev. Samuel Sturgis.5 She flaunted her deism. By 1741 her character, wrote Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, was held 'in universal Horror. I do not mean from her Galantrys, which no body trouble'd their Heads with, but she had a Collection of Free thinkers that met weekly at her House, to the Scandal of all Good Christians'.6  In July 1735 she was in Rome, visiting the French Academy, where she impressed the Director, Vleughels, with her interest in engravings, enamels and medals, telling him that she was renting a palace in Rome and would return.7 She came to Florence in mid-August for six weeks and on 2 November she arrived in Lucca.8 In July 1736 Lord Essex was writing to her in Rome,9 but she had arrived in Florence on 11 June, having 'taken a house to which furniture has been sent from the Great Duke's Wardrobe'.10 Billy Bristow [W.B.] was observing Lady Walpole's affairs at this time.11 In October 1736 he confessed to being rather shocked by her at Leghorn and Lucca, where she had hired a house for the winter and was joined by a 'chevalier ... beau et bien fait' from England, doubtless Samuel Sturgis. Later, in June 1737, Bristow said she had previously spent some time in Naples with one Gaferelli, a Neapolitan castrato. In August he reported her alone at Pisa with Sturgis, having previously attracted the attention of the Vatican by the Deism she vaunted in Florence; the Grand Duke, however, died before enquiries could be made and meanwhile Lady Orford's friends had become objects of hatred. She was still with Sturgis in 1739. In Florence in December they called together on Lady Pomfret who in turn visited them 'in a very fine House',12 and they were in Florence again in April 1740, but the Sturgis affair was cooling by February 1741.13  She was in Venice in September 1741 and in November was living in Salo on Lake Garda with Pietro Barbarigo, son of the podesta of Verona.14 By January 1742 she was back in Florence (17:283) beginning her liaison with Count Richecourt (chief minister of the Regency in Florence in the absence of the Austrian Grand Duke): 'all the world saw her daily at his house', remembered Horace Mann (19:200) who at the time was very suspicious of them. By July 1742, again according to Mann (who as a close friend of Horace Walpole was not a disinterested witness), she was being neglected by Florentine society (17:462), though this had little effect. In February 1744 she moved into the Palazzo Franceschi in the Via de'Guicciardini (18:391). Then, following her father-in-law's death in March, she left Florence on 28 May 1745 with Richecourt's under-secretary, the Abbé Niccoli, to take possession of her English estate (19:46f.). She returned to Italy in 1755 as the Countess of Orford. She arrived at Florence on 22 May 1755 (20:476n1), now enjoying a considerable income from her estates. Her husband had died in 1751, she had remarried within two months (the Hon. Sewallis Shirley) but by 1754 she had separated from her second husband.15 Richecourt had left Florence for Vienna in 1752 (20:252n5) and Mann, to his relief, was able to describe her behaviour as decorous; she now spoke well of the Walpole family and was received by society (20:479). She also continued to seek intellectual companionship. By October she was studying with the Abbé Giuseppe Buondelmonti and Dr Antonio Cocchi to become 'as great a proficient in medals as she is in other polite sciences'.16 She had already met Giulio Mozzi (1730-1813), the Florentine poet and mathematician, who remained her cavaliere servante until her death (21:70). Early in 1761 she asked Winckelmann (who adored her) to accompany her on a visit to Greece in the spring of 1761, but the scheme fell through.17 Lady Orford had negotiated the purchase of a house just outside Florence from the Salviati family in 1759 (21:310), but she was still not prepared to settle in one place. She had been in Lucca in 175918 and in November 1761 she was on her way from Lucca to Naples, intending to return to Florence the following May (21:550). Meanwhile in October 1761 she had presented G.B. Uguccioni, a senator and her quondam lover, with a splendid coach and horses for his wedding; they were duly rejected.19  Between 1762 and 1768 Mann made no mention of Lady Orford in his letters to Horace Walpole. James Martin saw her in Naples in January 1764,20 and Winckelmann said that by the time of the great eruption of Vesuvius on 19 October 1767, she had spent five years in Naples with Mozzi, living in a casino belonging to the marchese Berio; their house stood in the path of the oncoming lava and they were forced to flee.21 In 1768 Mann said Lady Orford had most elegant houses 'both in town and country' in Naples and two likewise in Florence (23:2). In May 1769 she set out from Florence for England 'to make a final settlement of her affairs there' (23:155) and Mozzi, then 'under a bad nervous disorder', accompanied her. After spending the winter in Aix they arrived in London in 1770 (23:120, 135n, 461). They arrived back in Florence, via Paris and Bologna, on 12 October 1771, when they were met outside the city by Mann and entertained in his house.22 In March 1772 in Naples it was noticed that Lady Orford had 'had two or three fits of illness lately and begins to think she is not a Young Woman'.23 By March 1773 she had completed the purchase of the Villa Medici at Fiesole (previously leased from the marchese del Serre; 23:463n). By the end of the year she had had a road made up to the Villa (24:190n4), and when Henry Swinburne visited it in 1779 he pronounced it 'perhaps the best furnished in Italy for neatness and propriety, but too high, too much confined, and on a rock which reflects a burning heat in summer'.24  Lady Orford's final years were spent wintering in Naples with the summers spent in Florence, always with Mozzi.25 In April 1773 Lord Winchilsea had written that Lady Orford was going to Naples 'in order to dispose of everything there, & to settle entirely in Florence, some people say ye reason is yt the Chevar Modzi now he has got a great deal settled upon him is not so tractable as he used to be, & prefers Florence',26 but she did not renounce Naples (she was passing through Capua on 15 November 177327). Throughout this period she was vexed by her son's affairs; unstable, unwell and unable to maintain Houghton (the Walpole seat), he sold the pictures to Catherine of Russia in 1774-but his mother no longer had the energy to return to England (23:468), even though Mann described her in September 1773 as rising every morning and maintaining 'a vivacity not common at her age' (23:512). In June 1777 she was taken ill in Rome while returning to Florence from Naples (24:312), but she had recovered by the autumn (24:330), though Mrs Frederick Hervey wrote in November that she had 'grown old in looks, tho' active as ever'.28 In December 1780 she had to renounce her journey to Naples through poor health (25:107) and went instead to Pisa, where she died on 13 January 1781. She was buried in the Protestant cemetery at Leghorn with a monument (see Francis Harwood). Mann told Horace Walpole of her estates, her 'great effects both here and in Naples', with £33,000 at Hoare's bank and 16,000 Florentine crowns (about £4000; 25:12-13). All was left to Mozzi, and her will made no mention of her son. At her request she was buried in the Protestant cemetery at Leghorn,29 suggesting Father Thorpe was mistaken when he wrote in 1771 that Lady Orford was 'said to have been converted'.30

The Duke of Ormonde, an English hero during the campaigns in Flanders, was subsequently attainted for his Jacobite sympathies and left England in July 1715. He never returned, and he enjoyed in his exile the highest honours from the Pretender. Though most of his time was spent in Spain and France, Ormonde was also in Russia in 1718 and briefly in Italy. He was reported to be in Genoa in November 1715,1 though this seems doubtful. In February 1717, with the Earl of Mar, he accompanied the Pretender from Avignon to Pesaro, where he spent four weeks before returning alone to Liège.2
A merchant, he was presumably the Mr Orr whose business was taken over by James Bird; his monument at Leghorn was erected by his son (Leghorn Inscr., 55).


Travelling from Florence with her daughter ['Deune', Diana?], she arrived in Padua on her way to Venice with a Mr Bishop on 11 October, and was in Venice on 14 October (ASV is 72, 772).
Mr Osbaldeston 'son to Dr Wiggins of Petworth a very good natured man with a good Fortune & voila tout',1 was presumably the Thomas Osbaldeston who arrived in Venice on 7 May.2
William Osbaldeston was in Padua on 18 December 1710,1 and by the 26th he was in Venice to see the Carnival.2 He was presumably the 'Mr Orbormiston' in Rome between March and May 1711, who met John Arundell Bellings and a Mr Kellond.3 A miniature portrait of 'Osbaldston' has been attributed to Rosalba Carriera (VAM).4

Osborn was made chargé d'affaires at Naples during the three-month absence of William Hamilton1 and he was living in Hamilton's house in January 1768.2 On 26 April he spent the day in Florence on his way to Bologna.3






After completing his studies as an artist, and acquiring many of the drawings left by his teacher John Brown, Ottley went to Italy in 1791 at the age of twenty. By the time he returned to London nine years later he had become an outstanding connoisseur of Italian art with a remarkable sympathy for 'primitive' (pre-Raphael) painting. He was additionally a formidable marchand amateur, one who had profited by the dispersal of so many Italian collections in the face of the French invasion.1 His stay in Italy is not well documented, but enough is known to indicate he was in relatively easy circumstances and was a dedicated student of Italian art. His name recurs in the Flaxman diary in 1792-4, when he was evidently based in Rome and a close friend of Flaxman. They were together at Castello on 2 June 1792, returning to Rome on the 10th, and Flaxman records Ottley's departure from Rome on 26 March 1793 and his return on 30 September.2 In April 1794 Ottley was one of the British artists who signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus (Rome List 1794). Ottley was very probably the 'Gulielmo Otoles Inglese - 26' / 'Gulielmo Oroles Inglese - 27' living on the Strada Felice in Rome between 1795 and 1797 (in the same house as Carlo Moliner, a painter).3 In 1796 in Rome Tomaso Piroli published engravings from Flaxmanesque designs by Ottley, Twelve Stories from the Life of Christ, and in May 1797 there followed thirteen plates, Stories of the Old Testament engraved by Piroli from designs by Ottley. Ottley was evidently friendly with Piroli with whom he made many drawings from early Italian paintings in Pisa, Florence and Assisi (some, dated between 1793 and 1798, were sold Sotheby's, 19 Oct. 1989). Ottley also met the landscape painter George Wallis (who had lived in Naples for some time before 1794); they left Rome together on an excursion to Naples in November 1796, returning early in December.4 Wallis was then illustrating scenes from Ossian, subjects sympathetic to Ottley as a pupil of John Brown.  In June 1797 Ottley endorsed a credit note of £50 for Joseph Gandy enabling him to escape from Rome, and Artaud provides a vivid glimpse of Ottley at this time with Mother Black Bull [see Ruth Ball] riding 'a light grey decorated with splendid trappings ... prancing up the Strada Felicia to turn with a grace that astonished all the little children and old thread spinners in the neighbourhood ... A superb sabre with a gilded hilt graced his manly thigh, and the martial expression of his physiognomy revealed that of the Woeful Countenance'.5 Ottley returned to London in March 1799, and Farington saw him in April 'wishing to pass some of his works through the Custom House'.6  Ottley is best known for the purchases he made in Italy of Italian drawings and paintings, most of which he subsequently sold in London.7 His acquisitions were made principally in 1798-9, but they are not well documented because of the irregularity of the market during the French wars. Pryse Gordon, for example, recounted buying from a broker in Florence in 1798/9 'several portfolios of drawings of old masters, the weedings of the gallery; there were 1500, and cost me only 20 dollars ... I put them into the hands of the celebrated connoisseur Mr O-y, whom I knew in Rome, he selected about 150, for which he gave me a liberal price'.8 The transaction with Ottley may have taken place in London, but Gordon's hole-in-corner purchase was typical of the period. When Farington noted (9 October 1798) that Wallis and Ottley supported the French cause in Rome, this was conceivably a reflection on their business methods. With his considerable knowledge, Ottley was able to buy spectacularly: drawings by Michelangelo, Raphael and Correggio, paintings by Raphael, Titian, Salvator Rosa, Claude and Guercino - besides names then less well known, such as Botticelli, Pesellino and Fra Angelico. One of Ottley's private London sales was advertised as a collection of '26 capital pictures, purchased at Rome in December 1798 ... brought to England in March 1799'; on 16 May 1801 Christie's sold 38 paintings 'purchased by Ottley at Rome, during the years 1798 and 1799' (they fetched 22,000 gns.),9 and there were further sales of paintings in 1803 and 1811, and of drawings in 1804, 1807 and 1814 (1779 lots).  The sale catalogues reveal that Ottley had bought, for example, from Martelli and Lamberto Gori in Florence; from Antonio Cavaceppi and the Colonnas in Rome, the Neapolitan Royal family and the Zanetti family in Venice. Immediately after his return to England Ottley acquired part of the collection of drawings gathered in Florence by the French artist J.B.J. Wicar, who was in charge of the official looting of pictures in Italy (the drawings, in fact, were stolen from Wicar in 1799 by Antonio Fedi). Ottley was unable to sell his earliest Italian pictures (his Botticelli found no buyer in 1811),10 and he retained a small gallery 'covered from floor to ceiling with pictures by the old Pre-Raphaelite artists which [he] had collected in Italy during the latter part of the last century. Most of them were taken from churches during the occupation by the French soldiery, and but for Mr Ottley's intervention might have been destroyed'.11


Francis Otway was in Padua on 23 March 1724 with William Chamber and Patrick Guthrie.1 He was perhaps the Otway who accompanied Lord Vere Beauclerk in Rome in May 1724.2 Captain Otway from Port Mahon was introduced to the Grand Duke at Florence in the first week of March 1725; on 28 March Captain Otway arrived in Florence with Chamber and Guthrie, intending to stay some time.3 After his retirement from the army in 1751 Otway was tutor to Lord Mandeville,4 and returned to Italy in 1758.
Colonel James Otway and Brigadier Andrew Bisset came together to Venice in mid-November 1720, intending to go on to Leghorn, but Bisset was taken ill and Otway stayed only a few days before leaving alone for Leghorn, see Bisset. Meanwhile Colonel Charles Otway told consul Fuller at Leghorn that his brother Colonel James Otway and Brigadier Bisset were 'on the road not far off'.1 James Otway alone reached Leghorn on 12 December 'with some other officers' and was to take 'the first opportunity of going to Port Mahon'.2 But on 21 July 1721 Colonel James Otway was in Padua with Captain Richard Otway.3

Colonel Oughton was noticed in Rome by James Russel in January 1753,1 and on 24 March 'A. Oughton' Lieut.Col: in the English Army' was a witness to the marriage of William Chambers.2
Sir William Ouseley came to Rome from Naples in March 1737; he was with his wife, who was described by Billy Bristow [W.B.] as one 'qui passe dans ce païs pour une beauté achevée. Le mari doit avoir pour le moins 20 ans plus que sa femme, jugés de la cour qu'on fait à la dernière; toute notre jeunesse en est amoureuse' (HMC Denbigh, 5:212; 10 Mar. 1737).
Outt', an English Protestant painter aged twenty-two was living in the Via Babuino in 1778, at the same address as 'Giuseppe', another painter aged twenty-four, and Philip Arger (AVR SA, S.Maria del Popolo).
Owen published Travels into different parts of Europe in the years 1791 and 1792 with familiar remarks on places - men - and manners [1796], a series of letters describing his journeys as tutor to a Mr L (whose delicate health required a southern climate). His text throughout has a conservative, moral tone and he defined his interests as being in 'human nature in all her varieties'. He was particularly severe on Rome: 'the majesty of Papal Rome is unquestionably and irrevocably doomed to fall', he wrote, later adding 'all is pride and ostentation without; all is coldness and reserve within'. Of Naples he had seen 'no place in which nature is less restrained by the laws of morals or even decorum'. Back in Rome he noted the now 'meagre entertainments' offered by the aging Cardinal de Bernis 'who for so many years represented the French Monarch at the Court of Rome'; the exiled aunts of Louis XVI were in attendance, 'antique and venerable'. Of works of art, Owen had wished to recognise the works of Raphael 'and to worship them almost by instinct', but when this did not happen he concluded he was insufficiently acquainted with the principles of art; Guido Reni's Penitent St Peter in Bologna, however, resurrected 'all [his] powers of admiration'.

He is very lame', wrote Horace Mann who saw Henry Oxenden in Florence in April 1746, 'and talks of going to Siena to repose and learn the language, and will return here again in June'.1 In October he was to be joined in Italy by his younger brother, George.2 In March 1747 Mann writes of having 'adjusted an affair' between Oxenden and one Fortini which had divided Siena into parties.3 In March 1750 Thomas Lennard Barrett said he had received particular civilities from 'Harry Oxenden's Cicisbea who is a very genteel woman but not handsome';4 this would have been Mme Bulgarini whom Oxenden had mentioned to Mann in 1749.5


Arthur Paget succeeded Sir William Hamilton as envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary at Naples. He arrived on 20 March 1800 and went on to Palermo, where the Neapolitan court resided during the French occupation. Hamilton found him 'cold and reserved'. He was received on 22 April, half an hour after a disconsolate Hamilton had taken his official leave. Paget left Palermo on 16 June 1801 (Morrison, 2:100, no.484. Fothergill 1969, 374-6. Horn, 2:129).

In July 1755, when he was already established as the leading architect of the north-east and clerk of works at Newmarket, Paine obtained a year's leave from the Board of Works 'to make the Tour of Italy'.1 He was, presumably, the 'Pain Sculptor Rome 1755', listed by Hayward. Little is known of his tour, though he appears to have studied Palladio's works in the Veneto, and he admired the elegant proportions of the three columns in the Campo Vaccino in Rome. In the preface to his Plans, Elevations and Sections of Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Houses [1767], the first instalment of his collected works (for which Piranesi was a subscriber), he wrote: 'if by travelling [the architect] imbibes a blind veneration for inconsistent antiquated modes, and ... consequently neglects to make himself acquainted with the various necessary conveniences requisite for the country in which he is to exert his talents ..[he] .. may be said to be a man of taste, but he will hardly be considered a man of judgment'.
In his early years James Paine junior wavered in the choice of profession between landscape and view painting, sculpture and architectural design. These interests were all exercised on his two Italian tours. His first tour was undertaken after he had come of age and inherited some property from his mother.1 A sketch book (VAM), inscribed J. Paine Rome 1766, contains views of Tivoli, Capua, Naples, Vesuvius (1767), Florence and Venice (1769); one leaf is inscribed 'By memory for an antient Base Relievo at Portichi, out of Herculanium, this subject I modelled at Rome in Base Relievo, and was purchased by Sir William Hamilton'. He was probably the 'Paine' who had recently arrived in Florence by 10 January 1767.2 James Barry's Self-portrait (NPG) shows him with Paine and the French painter Dominique Lefèvre. In 1767 Barry wrote that Paine had executed a model of Venus and Adonis, and the 'novelty, genius and agreeable manner with which he has treated it, has got him no small degree of credit'3 (Horace Walpole however was highly critical of Paine's sculpture exhibits at the SA in 1770). In Venice Paine met Joseph Smith who presented him with a copy of the 1768 facsimile edition of Palladio.  Paine undertook his second tour with his wife, immediately after their marriage in August 1773. They were with Alexander Day at Lyons on 23 December 1773 and the party had reached Turin on 7 January 1774.4 Joseph Wright of Derby and his party arrived with them in Rome on 3 February5 and Ozias Humphry, Romney and Parry greeted them on their arrival.6 That summer they suffered much from the heat of Rome.7 Their son, James Thomas (d. 1783), was born, but not christened8 (Romney was to paint his portrait in London in 1776). A second sketch book (VAM) includes studies of antique statues, a measured drawing of a cast of the Medici Venus in the French Academy, and measured plans of the Villa Borghese, the Baths of Diocletian and the Farnese Palace (some signed J. Paine Jr Architect Rome delt). Paine and his wife had returned to London by 1776 when they were living in Charlotte Street. Paine is said to have continued to give his address as 'Rome' up to 1783 (DBS), and a sketch-book (VAM) has drawings by a J. Paine and John Deare of 1784-9 (the sculptor  Deare was in Italy from 1785). In his later years Paine pursued a modest practice as a topographical water-colourist.

Lord Peasly' was in Rome with Samuel Crisp who mentioned him there in letters of 8 January and 18 April 17391 and 'Lord Pesely' came from Bologna to Florence for a week on 21 September.2 A 'Lord Phisely' had been reported leaving Leghorn for England on 22 August.3 (He was possibly the Hon. James Hamilton elected to the Dilettanti in 1737.)
Palgrave accompanied William Weddell in Italy and appears with him in Nathaniel Dance's double portrait (Upton Ho.) which is dated Rome 1765. His friend the poet Thomas Gray encouraged him to write the journal of his tour ('quodcumque videris, scribe & describe; memoria ne fide'),1 which in 1853 belonged to a Mr Lawson of Boroughbridge, who also had a small collection of antiquities Palgrave had made in Italy.2 On his return he became a member of Gibbon's Roman Club.3 A projected second trip with the poet William Mason in 1782 did not materialise.4


The Thomas Palmer described above, who in 1772 gave to the University library at Harvard a view of Mount Vesuvius and nine volumes of Piranesi's engravings,1 may be identified with the Palmer in Rome in June 1764. On 21 May, with his compatriots Samuel Powel, John Morgan and John Apthorp, he began one of James Byres's courses of antiquities and their notes have survived (Powel 1764 MSS); the course ended on 8 June. On 3 June Palmer dined in Rome with James Martin, Lord Exeter and others.2 In November 1773 Thomas Palmer furnished J.S. Copley with letters of introduction to Byres and William Hamilton, which suggests he went on to Naples in the course of his tour.3

Probably also the Palmer received by the Duchess of Beaufort in Rome in May 1773, see Elizabeth, Duchess of Beaufort.Palmer was noticed at Florence in September and at Rome in December, playing cards with Sir Horatio Mann, Sir John Lindsay, the 8th Duke of Hamilton and William Fawkener.1 He was presumably the Mr Palmer for whom Alexander Day was seeking rooms in Rome late in 1775,2 and was conceivably the John Palmer of Bath who corresponded in England with Ozias Humphry in 1779.3
A 'good natured poetical, stuttering Viscount', Palmerston lacked the political distinction of his more famous son, but he was a discerning patron and collector of works of art, besides being an enquiring traveller.1 He travelled, said William Guise, 'more to inform than to amuse himself, and few people take more pains to better purpose'.2  He was first in Italy as a young man in 1763. Seven weeks after reaching Turin he was in Naples, where he spent much of his time with the Spencers (John, 1st Viscount Spencer). He passed through Capua on 13 December, reaching Naples the same day, three weeks after the Spencers.3 Together they visited Paestum (still an unfamiliar excursion) where, said Palmerston, 'I was more struck with [the ruined Greek temples] than with anything I ever saw except the first view of Rome'. They also witnessed the effects of the famine which was then afflicting Naples: 'not a day passed without disturbance and skirmishes'. Paintings of Naples were commissioned, presumably at this time (two large views by Joli and a set of five smaller scenes; now untraced). Palmerston left Naples four days before the Spencers, passing through Capua on 8 March.3 He spent nearly three months in Rome, studying and reflecting upon antiquities, whose effect, he wrote, 'depends upon the disposition of the mind and not upon any particular skill or practice in the arts.' Ancient marbles particularly appealed to him: 'besides their merit, they had the charm of novelty to recommend them. I have seen, before I came to Italy, pictures almost as good as those at Rome, but I never saw a statue worth looking at till I crossed the Alps'.  Both Lord Spencer and Palmerston purchased antiquities in Rome from Gavin Hamilton, Palmerston paying £525 for a number of pieces and leaving orders for which he paid a further £180 over the next two years. He also commissioned from Hamilton a large Homeric painting of Briseis and Achilles, which was due to be sent to England in November 1766 (and was exhibited at the RA in 1770).4 From Angelica Kauffman, who had recently arrived in Rome, Palmerston commissioned a copy of Barocci's Holy Family and his own portrait, holding a plan of the temple at Paestum with a distant view of Vesuvius behind him (Broadlands). Further commissions in Rome included a Boy and a Dolphin from the sculptor Nollekens, a copy of Guercino's Dido in the Palazzo Spada from Giuseppe Bottani and some topographical drawings by Richard Wilson's pupil, Robert Crone. Palmerston also bought a large landscape by Salvator Rosa (untraced). At the end of May Palmerston arrived in Venice, a few days before the Duke of York. Received into the Duke's suite, Palmerston followed a round of state functions. Imagine, he wrote, 'the greatest possible misery that a formal dinner or ball can bring with it, and you will then have some idea of what one may suffer when a state is determined to exert itself to the utmost'. He was amused to learn that these entertainments were held, by order of the state, at the expense of four Venetian noblemen who were, he thought, 'ignorant and silly and their attendance was often very troublesome and oppressive'. Together with other young men in the royal suite, Palmerston was included by Richard Brompton in the conversation piece commissioned by the Duke (see Brompton). In the course of his Swiss tour of 1770, made with William Pars, Hans Sloane and Hatsell [John Hatsel?], Palmerston travelled down the valley from Mont St Gothard to Lake Maggiore, and visited the Borromean Islands, Milan and Como, before recrossing the border into Switzerland. Palmerston's last Italian visit was made when he was past fifty, and at a time when revolutionary France was threatening Europe. His London house was being altered and he considered it a good opportunity for his second wife to discover Italy, while his oldest child, the eight-year-old Henry John Temple (the future Prime Minister), might begin to broaden his mind; there were four other small children, a boy and three girls, aged between two and six. They were accompanied by Charles Blagden, the distinguished secretary of the Royal Society, and for much of the time by Mary Carter (see Carter Letters). The tour lasted two and a half years, during which Lord Palmerston kept detailed accounts, while his wife (who did not altogether share his antiquarian zeal) gave more lively accounts in letters to her brother in England. She was remarkable, said Lady Webster, for speaking well, even to a fault, of everybody.5 On their way through France they had witnessed unsavoury scenes in the National Assembly and on the borders of Italy Piedmontese soldiers were going off to defend Savoy against the French (who invaded as the Palmerstons reached Turin). At Novi they saw Austrian troops marching to support the Piedmontese. But Lady Palmerston was able to comment on the quality of the opera at Turin and at Parma she observed that 'the want of any person who can clean a picture is much felt in Italy and it's really melancholy to see so many fine pictures suffering from dirt and want of straining' (16 Oct.). Her appreciation of painting was, however, finite; at Bologna they saw 'some fine churches and palaces and ... many beautiful pictures, but' she wrote, 'I will not detail them as nothing is more tiresome' (20 Oct.). At Rome they met the Mesdames de France (the exiled aunts of Louis XVI) with Cardinal de Bernis. Colin Morison acted as their guide. The cold was excessive in the Vatican museum, but Lady Palmerston commented that 'the magnificence of the collection exceeds everything one can form an idea of'; she noted that each year there was a lottery in Rome, the profits of which were taken by the Pope for improvements to the Museum and the purchase of marbles.  They passed quickly on to Naples where they learned of the execution of Louis XVI. They were introduced at Court and met Lady Plymouth and Lady Cholmondeley, but it was Emma Hamilton who held Lady Palmerston's attention. Emma and Sir William together put her in mind of June and January, but Emma was full of 'good humour and I must always think her a very extraordinary character'. On 17 January they dined with the Hamiltons; 'we sat down 53 and he had received 20 excuses. Conceive there are 73 strange English at Naples at present, and a hundred more expected from Rome', wrote Lady Palmerston. The King conducted them round the royal silk manufactory and impressed them with the ease and kindness of his manners. In April they made excursions to Capri and Ischia, but by the end of the month they were back in Rome. They encountered the Duchess of Devonshire with Lady Bessborough who was looking very ill. Angelica Kauffman painted the little Elizabeth Temple between May and December 1793 and the portrait gave such pleasure that a miniature copy was taken (both at Broadlands). They left Rome in June and travelled directly to Milan. There they were reunited with Blagden (it is not clear when he had left their party) who introduced them to Count Rumford - 'a great acquisition to our Society', said Lady Palmerston who found much favour with him. In July the Palmerstons passed into Switzerland; Rumford rejoined them at Berne in August and they were able to observe French and Austrian camps on the Swiss borders. Early in September they retraced their steps to Italy, while Blagden went on alone to England. At Milan they attended a grand gala to mark the [Austrian] Emperor's name day (4 October). Their intended progress to Naples was delayed when young Harry was taken ill at Verona, and then Lord Palmerston became briefly indisposed at Florence where, however, the party was able to enjoy the company of Peter Beckford and his children. The Palmerstons finally reached Naples in mid-December.  Naples was more restrained with the threat of war and they were privately rebuked for opening up their rouge et noir tables.6 Lady Palmerston found 'half my Neapolitan acquaintances shut up; some for state offences, but more for imprudences in love affairs'. Rumford joined them on 3 January 1794 and the next day, with Lady Hamilton, they all attended the Princess Belmonti, whose husband had just died. According to custom the Princess sat all day in a darkened room receiving her acquaintances; 'luckily', observed Lady Palmerston, few people care for their departed half, or it must be the most wretched ceremony'. For four months they stayed on in Naples, their excursions including a visit to Capri with the Dowager Viscountess Spencer. They left early in May travelling directly to Venice, where they arrived three days before Ascension Day. Lord Palmerston noted that the Bucentaur was 'quite the worst boat that can be devised', being 'a cumbersome unweildy barge ... loaded with carved work and dirty gilding'. The sposilazio was deferred for a week on account of the weather, a frequent occurrence, wrote Palmerston, 'under the idea of keeping strangers in Venice'. The Palmerstons left Venice before 16 June (according to the Venetian state records, although Lady Webster said they were still there on 5 July).7 By October 1794 the party were back in Harwich. Palmerston had made more purchases of works of art in the course of this second tour, probably with his London house in mind. Apart from old masters acquired in Florence and Bologna, these included further views of Naples by Philipp Hackert and Lusieri. A Supper at Emmaus attributed to Giovanni di San Giovanni is now the only Italian seicento picture at Broadlands. Palmerston reckoned his total expenditure for this second tour of Italy to have been nearly £9000; it was as well he had received a sizeable inheritance on his mother's death in 1789.

On 16 September 1799 William Compton in Posillipo appealed to Emma Hamilton on behalf of 'Our most unfortunate countrywoman, Mrs Palombi and her family', with '3 children, one at the breast, no money, no servants', an invalid, who had been 'well-born, well-educated, & with far better, nay, considerable prospects in life before her unfortunate marriage' (Morrison, 2:69-70, no.427).


Panton gave a concert in Rome in December 1755 which was attended by Lord Nuneham, Lord Villiers and Robert Adam, who described him as 'one Mr Panton, son to the rich and famous Racer Panton at Newmarket'.1 He has also been identified as the Mr Panton who left Venice in February 1760 for Rome and Naples with a Mr Stuart, and who was (almost inevitably) called 'a pretty man' by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.2
Thomas Panton senior, merchant at Leghorn, died on 22 April 1796, his tombstone at Leghorn describing him as one of the oldest members of the British Factory.1 He was presumably the Thomas Panton whose infant son, Thomas Douglas Panton, was buried in Leghorn in 1759 ('lamented by his parents Thomas and Margaret Panton') and whose wife Margaret died in Leghorn aged thirty-five in 1771.1  The Mr Panton with three daughters, 'Gentiluomo Inglese con Famiglia', who travelled from Rome to Venice arriving on 31 May 1794,2 was doubtless Thomas Panton junior, also a merchant at Leghorn, married to Louisa Jane, whose infant daughters Louisa and Mary were buried at Leghorn in 1795 and 1801.1 Father and son had subscribed to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave in 1790.
Panton was listed in Florence on 23 March 1771,1 and on 4 May Cardinal Albani told Horace Mann he would help 'Le Sr Panron' in Rome.2
In his application to the Artists' General Benevolent Institution in 1830 Panzetta stated that he had been a pupil of Joseph Wilton, who was also his godfather, and of J.B. Cipriani, and after a long residence in Italy for improvement he had returned to London in 1787 (DBS).
In 1718 Thomas Papillon 'son to Philip Papillon', had been 'several years' with his uncle, George Henshawe, British consul at Genoa, who was proposing to leave him as chargé d'affaires in his absence, see Henshawe. He was presumably the Thomas Papillon who was in Padua on 19 December 17181 and the 'Mr Papillon an Eng: Gent traveler' who died in Venice, where he was buried in January 1719.2
A cousin of Sir Roger Newdigate, Charles Parker was an amateur artist, geologist and mineralogist, besides being well versed in the classics. His first tour, which interrupted his studies at Oxford, was with Newdigate (whose wife had recently died) and Sir Roger's sister-in-law, Mary Conyers. Some of the drawings Parker then made of Aosta in Piedmont are preserved with the Newdigate papers. He described his second tour in a series of lengthy letters to Sir Roger and Lady Newdigate (his second wife), interspersed with a travel journal (Parker letters MSS). It was centred on Sicily, where he observed the terrible effects of the February 1783 earthquake at Messina, and the journal principally describes Greek sites and natural phenomena, subjects which he may possibly have discussed with Sir William Hamilton. His own interests appear to have been more in vulcanology than architecture.  He had begun his tour with William Bromley, a richer and younger man, whose guardians had entrusted him to Parker's care, but their tastes differed and they parted company on arrival in Sicily (though they were to meet again thereafter). Parker's account conscientiously reports on the changes since he last toured in Italy with Sir Roger; thus in Florence he sketched the new display of the Tribuna,1 and in Rome he described the publications of the Piranesi firm following the death of Giovanni Battista in 1778. He also took drawing lessons from 'little' Fabrini ('the same quiet, civil little being'), and with an unknown master in Rome. He bought pictures, books and objects of art for Sir Roger ('Tastes are always different, but as mine was formed under you, I think there must be some similarity'), as well as medals and books for himself. He talked with the 'learned & ingenious' Allan Ramsay in Naples in June 1783. In March 1784 he noted between 30 and 40 English in Rome 'which rejoices the Antiquaries & Picture Sellers'. In Venice2 he saw the Ascension festivities and two Regattas, the 'Boats with silken sails & silver oars, like Cleopatra's Barge on the Cydnos'.  On his return journey (on which a Mr Repington was his companion) Parker's drawings were shown to the Court of Brunswick (September 1784). Many are now preserved in a private collection and one of the Straits of Messina (including a view of Palmi), may have been used by Wright of Derby (see Joseph Wright). Sir Roger had intended to make Parker heir to his estates, but he predeceased him and the estates passed instead to his younger brother, Francis Parker Newdigate.

Mr Parker, my Lord Chancellor's son' and 'Mr Moore a son of ye late Bishop of Ely's' were reported in Venice on 15 December 1719.1 It would appear that in 1720 the antiquary Edward Wright was sent out from England to accompany Parker elsewhere in Italy and he subsequently published a learned but laborious account of his travels with George Parker as Some Observations made in travelling through France, Italy, &c. in the years 1720, 1721, and 1722 [1730, 2nd ed. 1764 (refs. cited in brackets)]. It appears Wright travelled alone until he reached Reggio d'Emilia in the summer of 1720, but thereafter his Observations refer constantly to 'we'. Wright had arrived in Calais on 12 March 1720 and 'did but just pass thro' France', before leaving San Remo on 12 May for Genoa. 'Being obliged to pursue my journey onwards with what convenient speed I could', Wright travelled down through Pisa and Leghorn and, 'after a short stay in Rome,' travelled to Reggio d'Emilia in company with a Milanese Baron, with whom he conversed in Latin (27). Parker and Wright then went through Parma and Modena in July (35) and thence through Verona, Vicenza and Padua, where they were recorded on 22 September.2 Parker was in Bologna on 25 November3 and wrote to his father describing the city on 10 December 17204 (although Wright does not describe the city until, apparently, December 1721). To judge from Wright's detailed descriptions, they stayed at Venice during the Carnival, early in 1721. From Venice they travelled to Ferrara and passed down the Adriatic coast, Wright describing how they took with them 'a double fede [or testimonial] one to certify we were well, the other that we were sick', to ensure they were not required to undergo quarantine (the plague was then prevalent in France) nor to forgo meat during Lent; 'twas necessary in our case to shuffle our cards right' (112). At Loreto both travelers were disconcerted, Wright describing 'the crawling of the pilgrims round the holy house on their hands on knees, saying over their beads, every now and then kissing the ground as they creep along' (123), and Parker, in a letter to his father of 15 March 1721,4 regretting the huge discrepancy between the 'vast treasure of jewels and other riches' at the Santuario della Madonna and the poverty of the inhabitants. They were briefly in Rome from 12 to 17 March when they set out for Naples. Wright described Naples as 'the finest [city] in Italy - the streets large, strait, and excellently well pav'd ... The Strada di Toledo is the principal street, and is the noblest I ever saw' (149). They returned to Rome for Holy Week, to discover that the death of Pope Clement XI (on 19 March) had curtailed the ceremonies. They apparently stayed in Rome through the summer, since on 16 October 1721 Parker called on Rawlinson in Rome, having just learned of his father's elevation to the peerage (as the Earl of Macclesfield, so that Parker himself now became Viscount Parker). A week later he and Wright departed,3 going north through Leghorn, Pisa and Lucca (which Parker described to his father in a letter of 29 November),4 and from Pistoia to Florence, where Rawlinson recorded them on 22 December.3 From the Uffizi Parker acquired casts taken by Pietro Cipriani 'in copper' of the Venus de Medici and the Dancing Faun (both had recently been cast by Soldani, Cipriani's master, for the Duke of Marlborough) and additional casts of busts of Plautilla and Geta; Parker also took away the mould of the former, the Grand Duke not wishing it to be left in Florence (412; some casts remain at Shirburn Castle today). According to Wright, they had been in Bologna on 7 December, and afterwards passed through Modena, Reggio d'Emilia, Parma and Piacenza to Milan. There, he said, there were 'three entire galleries of pictures (several of them very fine) to be sold; they were General Martin's, General Aresi's, and Count Airoldi's'. His account also indicates they were still in Milan on Maunday Thursday and Good Friday 1722 (472). They left Italy through Bergamo, Brescia and Verona, thence 'we came by way of the Tirol, and so thro' Germany to Holland', finally reaching London on 17 July 1722. Wright does not, of course, record Lord Parker's amorous propensities, but by February/March 1722 he had spent 'nearly two months at Trevi with a woman of Venice, not very beautiful, but much beloved by him. He lavished so much attention upon her that he scandalized his servants, some of whom wished to leave him'. He went with her from Trevi to Verona, to the annoyance of his father, who tried to have him stopped and directed that the lady should be secured 'either in a monastery, or where [his son] may not know how to find her'.5
Parker travelled with his first wife, who died in Naples. It was presumably he whom James Martin visited in Rome on 20 September 1764 ('Mr Parker & Another English Gentleman lately arrived from Naples').1 Angelica Kauffman, who had arrived in Rome in April, painted his portrait in 1764 (Saltram),2 and she was to receive several subsequent commissions for Saltram. Parker's collection (largely preserved at Saltram) included Italian views by Ricciardelli and Philipp Hackert, and others attributed to Codazzi. His old master paintings were subsequently acquired with the help of Joshua Reynolds (of whom Parker was a notable patron and friend) and his second wife, who was noted for her 'skill and exact judgment in the fine arts'.3
John Parker, the querulous and unsuccessful history painter, is often confused with the younger John Parker (landscape painter) and (more deliberately) with the older Mark Parker (the antiquary). He was said to have lived twenty-three years in Rome, which implies he arrived c.1740.1 He dated a sketch Rome 1748/9, and was living on the Corso in 1749.2 In 1749 he attempted to take over the role of resident British antiquary from Mark Parker, who had been banished from Rome that year, but he was not supported, for example, by Horace Mann.3 In May 1752 he became the first (and only) director of the short-lived British Academy at Rome, of which his patron, Lord Charlemont, was the principal sponsor.4 James Russel, for one, considered this appointment unsatisfactory.5 Parker's régime was interrupted in 1754-5 by an injury to his leg; in May 1755 he told Charlemont he had been laid up ten months in Naples (he had passed through Capua on 27 May 1754) and in July he was still incapacitated in Rome.6 In his absence the Academy became 'an asylum for artistic scamps' and in 1755 Charlemont decided to wind it up, following a scuffle involving Thomas Warner and Patch.7  Parker's own credibility then suffered further from the suspicion that he interfered with Charlemont's correspondence, particularly over Piranesi's dedication of the Antichita Romane [1756]. Largely through Parker's interference, it would appear, the dedication was withdrawn. Parker apologised to Charlemont for 'having so unhappily introduced that villain to your presence',8 and Piranesi caricatured him as 'a fat fellow, with a swelled leg, his hat fallen off'.9 Parker spent an unhappy winter in 1757-8, complaining that 'Piranesi, Russell, Jenkins and their crew, ruined me', that 'Cardinal Corsini [had been] maliciously informed that I was the Parker who was banished Rome [i.e. Mark Parker]', and that he was prevented from seeing John, Lord Brudenell.10  Parker's fortunes as an artist were equally mixed. He had studied under Marco Benefial, whose portrait of him, dated 1761, is in the Accademia di S.Luca. On 6 March 1754 he was elected a member of the Accademia del Disegno in Florence, and on 3 October 1756 to the Accademia di S.Luca in Rome.11 Parker's altarpiece showing SS.Benedict, Sylvia and Gregory remains in situ in the church of S.Gregorio, Monte Celio, but his other Roman works are known only from his letters. For Lord Charlemont he painted two subjects from Milton (almost finished on 22 May 1756) and made two copies from the Farnese ceiling; he also listed seven large histories which he had completed by October 1758, the subjects being Apelles, Zeuxis, Epaminondas, Agrippina, Socrates, Cataline and Hamilcar.12 His oil sketch for the Death of Cleopatra, dated Rome 1748/9, is in the BMPL.  Parker's letters to Charlemont13 also describe the acquisitions he made for his patron. These included pictures by Caravaggio, Honthorst and Tintoretto (28 Feb. 1756), medals, bronzes, marble busts, 'a basso-relief of Venus by Gugliemo della Porta' (26 Jul. 1755), and a cast of Giambologna's Mercury 'moulded by signore Bracci' (5 Apr. 1758), for which he was granted an export licence on 5 September 1758.14 He also advised Charlemont on the design of his Casino by Luigi Vanvitelli (24 Dec. 1755; subsequently built by Vierpyl to the designs of William Chambers). Parker received further commissions to buy pictures for Sir William Stanhope (22 May 1756) which were subsequently withdrawn (20 Feb. 1759). On 20 February 1759 he wrote to Charlemont that 'without work friends or money, and loss of reputation so unjustly. My condition is deplorable ... I have no other prospect but misery'. He had returned to London by 1763.
In 1772 he went with his wife to Rome,1 where he was 'the only English artist who has consented to have his child christened'.2 He was elected to the Accademia del Disegno, Florence, on 12 January 1772,3 and one of his landscapes, dated 1775, remains in the Accademia di S.Luca, implying he was still in Rome that year. He sent eight landscapes and one historical subject to the Free SA from Rome in 1772-3.
Mark Parker spent most of his life in Italy. Robert Adam said that '[Parker's] father, having been sent Intendant to Florence, married a German woman there. He dying and she being a Catholic, educated [Mark Parker] in those principles. He entered the service of the Pope, was captain of his galleys'.1 He married in Rome Marie-Madeleine Sarner (1707-after 1771), and their daughter, Virginia Cecilia (b. Rome 1728), married the French painter Joseph Vernet in Rome in 1745. Parker was described as English in his daughter's marriage contract (and it was said that Captain Parker had allowed Vernet to witness a storm at sea in 1744).2  Parker was living in the Strada Vittoria in 1727 ('Marco Parcher') but had left the apartment in 1728;3 Joseph Spence met him in Rome in 1732 and 1740-1,4 Martin Folkes met 'Mr Parker the Antiquary who lives here [in Rome]' in November 1733,5 and Lady Grisell Baillie, who described him as a good antiquary and 'cousen to Mr Parker the Beedle at Oxford', also met him in Rome between 1731 and 1733.6 Horace Mann called him 'a noted antiquarian',7 and although he was sometimes exasperated by his manner,8 acknowledged that Parker often had good things; his purchases from Cardinal Cibo, for example, were 'much talked of, and are of good names'.9 Between 1738 and 1745 Parker obtained eleven export licences, principally for statuary and reliefs, but including some unspecified pictures.10 After his daughter's marriage to Vernet it appears he also acted as an agent for English patrons of his son-in-law's work.  In 1741 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu mentioned 'an English Antiquarian' in Rome whom she believed was a government (i.e., a Hanoverian) spy,11 and in 1744 Cardinal Albani told Mann that Parker whose 'profession est de faire L'Antiquaire, et ce sont la tous les revenus qu'il a pour se tenir a Rome,' was being discredited by the Jacobites. In 1749 Parker was quietly ordered out of Rome by the Inquisition, apparently as a result of some confessions made in 1749 at one of Jack St Leger's wild dinner parties. Whatever the evidence of impiety, it was serious enough for Albani to accept that nothing could be done.12 James Russel's father wrote on 18 October 1749 that Parker 'was banished Rome, and shut up in a monastery for life'.13 Russel said Parker had retired to a convent at Siena and become 'exceedingly godly and penitent'.14 On 6 June 1752 Russel wrote that Vernet, Parker's son-in-law, was on his way to Siena15 and it would appear that shortly afterwards Parker left Italy with Vernet. Vernet allegedly included the figure of Parker with his family in the foreground of his Port of Marseilles painted in 1754 (Louvre) and in December that year Robert Adam met in Toulon, 'an old Englishman called Parker', with his daughter and son-in-law, Joseph Vernet.16 In October 1765 Parker, then settled in Paris, told Henry Hoare that he lived with his son-in-law 'as I have done ever sience I was oblidged to leave Rome, by an order from the Inquisition'.17
Robert Parker FAS' is identified by his bookplate in the 'Journal of a Tour into Italy' (Parker jnl.MSS) which provides his itinerary. He travelled with his wife. In three weeks they passed from the Veneto to Naples where they were to spend four months, from December 1792 to March 1793. They saw an eruption of Vesuvius on 15 December; they met the Websters and the Palmerstons, and attended balls given by Lady Cholmondeley, Lady Plymouth and Lord Berwick. They spent only two weeks in Rome and a week in Venice at the end of their tour, and their prolonged stay in Naples was probably made for health reasons.  There is only slight mention of works of art, but Parker admired the paintings of Philipp Hackert and G.A. Wallis ('Wallace') and the 'transparent Watercolours' by Lusieri ('Don Titta' and 'Don Teta'). At Rome he described at length the famous monuments and made a list of 'Names of celebrated Artists residing at Rome in our time 1792 & 1793' (apparently taken from the Rome List 1793, which is pasted in his Journal, and the Rome List 1790, of which Parker also made a copy). His annotations show he visited several of the artists, but apparently he left no commissions. His journal also contains a list of 'English Families and Persons that we met with on Tour' (Parker list MSS). A Mr and Mrs Parker and family were in Venice on 11 May 1793; they were called 'Milord e Miladi Parker' on their departure on 13 May (ASV is 767).

Thomas Parker's identity is confirmed by Lady Knight1 who described him as the son of the Earl of Macclesfield and the nephew of Mrs Drake. Writing from Rome in December 1792, she mentioned his 'good-humour, agreeableness and gentleness' and alludes to his friends Mr and Mrs William Mackay. Robert Parker recorded meeting an Hon. Henry Parker in Naples between December 1792 and March 1793, probably in error for Thomas.2
Parker, an artist of whom little is known, travelled to Italy sponsored by Thomas Coke.1 On 24 October 1722 he wrote from Rome to his patron explaining how, after a three-month sea voyage, he had spent a week at Leghorn before going to Florence where Magnolfi and Bianchi (to whom Coke had given him introductions) showed him the Grand Duke's Palace and Gallery, 'and promis'd me I should copy what I pleased'. In Rome Luti had received him 'very kindly' and 'shewed me all his drawings ... I shall begin a Boy's Head of his drawing this week'. William Kent had given him a letter to Luti, and Kent's friends, especially Andrew Hay, had shown him 'much civility'. He was presumably the Mr Parker who with James Ingoldesby visited Luti in Rome on 29 July 1724.2 On 10 December 1725 Parker's father in Gravesend forwarded to Coke the second picture from his son in Rome (they showed 'Angelica Adora' and 'Perseus or Ladon').3



A portrait painted in Rome by Batoni c.1767-8 showing a gentleman holding a letter addressed to Monsieur Parn[ell] Rome has been identified as Sir John Parnell (Clarke/ Bowron 313, 314; Castle Ward, Co. Downe, and priv. coll.). But a Robert Parnell arrived in Venice on 11 December 1769 with Robert Scott and Thomas Fletcher,1 and was with Scott in Florence on 23 December 1769,2 see Robert Scott. A 'Mr Parnale', perhaps the same, arrived in Venice on 22 May 1770 with a Mr Aberdeen.3
Elizabeth Gibbes noticed Mr Parr in Naples in March 1790 and in Rome in April.1 He was staying in Venice with Mr Wolstenholme at the Scudo di Francia in May-June 1790 and was probably the 'Parr' recorded in Venice that October/November and between December 1791 and April 1792.2 Morritt wrote that he had received 'every kindness' from Parr in Venice in 1796.3 He was presumably the 'Federico Paar' staying in Venice in 1795-7 (with John La Touche and Joseph Jeffry in 1795).4
His presence in Rome in December 1707 was noted by James Gibbs.1 'Sigr.Giacomo Paret' was listed as living in the Strada della Croce with 'Sigre Harcourt' [Simon Harcourt] at Easter 1708.2


Parry's first trip to Italy was sponsored by his patron Sir Watkin Williams Wynn, and he is said to have set out in 1770.1 'Monsu Pari Inglese' a painter aged 26, was listed living on the Via Babuino at Easter 1771 and again (as 'Peri') in 1773-5.2 In Rome he was friendly with Dusign (like Parry, a former pupil of Reynolds) who probably shared rooms with him and who died there in 1773.3 Early in 1774, with Romney and Humphry, Parry met James Paine junior and his wife with Alexander Day as they arrived in Rome.4 By then Parry had become known for his copies.  In 1774 he succeeded in getting scaffolding erected in the church of S.Pietro in Montorio in order to copy Raphael's Transfiguration.5 Sir Watkin, who was already giving him a pension of £150 each year, bought two such copies, the larger for 400 gns.6 Parry also acquired a tracing of the picture which he was to bring to England, 'where it is supposed that he will make much money by it'.7 Parry was in Capua on 28 April 1774 with Delane and Hugh Dean on his way to Naples, where he spent May and June.8 In April 1775 he left Rome intending to copy the Correggio Holy Family with S.Jerome at Parma, which in the event he left unfinished in June for his pupil Robillard to complete-because, Joseph Wright explained, 'the picture did not appear so fine to him a second time as it did the first'.9 Parry had apparently met J.S. Copley in Parma.10 His Correggio copy and another of a Roman Charity in Rome were also acquired by Sir Watkin, together with an original portrait by Parry of the dwarf Baiocco.11 On his return to London Parry introduced Thomas Jones to Christopher Norton (and the two subsequently travelled together to Italy).12 Parry returned to Italy, probably in 1789 (he had been exhibiting from addresses in England in 1783, 1787 and 1788). James Northcote said the purpose of this second visit was 'to seek employment in art, in addition to the wish of stifling the regret for the loss of an aimiable wife; he accordingly commenced the copying of some of the finest pieces in that capital'. Parry was in Rome on 26 May 1789,13 and in 1790 his name appeared on a list of English artists at Rome as a history painter living at the Casa di Battoni, near the Strada Condotta (Rome List). In a letter to Sir Roger Newdigate dated Rome, 1 September 1790, Parry said he already had copies of Michelangelo's Last Judgment, Raphael's Madonna della sedia and the Mars and Venus by Rubens in the Pitti, and he offered to make copies on his return journey through Florence and Bologna.14 'But his health was soon so much impaired', wrote Northcote, 'that he was induced to return to England, where he did indeed arrive, but only to breath his last'.

Pars had already travelled in the Middle East and Switzerland when he left England for Rome at the end of 1775. He had then taken up with the wife of Samuel Smart the miniature painter and, according to Thomas Jones, he 'neglected all other pursuits for her with such an inattention to business, finding he could not remain long in England, and being naturally of a roving disposition - He accepted of, from the [Dilettanti] Society, a small pension of 60 pounds a year to study in Italy 3 Years - With this scanty commission and a few Commissions from [Lord Palmerston], he set off with the Lady'.1  Although they lost their luggage on the road to Paris,2 they reached Rome on 21 December 1775.3 They were doubtless the 'Guilerme Paris' an English painter aged 35-6 and 'Madama Marianne Vulcoch' aged 28 living near the Via Babuino in 1776; in 1777 the painter 'Paris' was sharing the address with Henry Tresham.4 Pars had been warmly recommended by Horace Walpole to both Horace Mann and William Hamilton ('he is so modest you will like him, and the Italian ladies will not; but he looks as if it was worth their while to cure him'.5 As a close friend, Pars figures frequently in Jones's Memoirs: they sketch together at Frascati (April-May 1777), in la Storta (July 1777), Rome (August 1779), Albani (24 Feb. 1780), and Naples (June 1781) and they shared lodgings in Rome (in the Strada Gregoriana, Feb.-Jun. 1779) and Naples (June 1781). By April 1778 'Mrs Pars' was described as dying of a galloping consumption,6 and she died in Rome on 6 June 1778. At her funeral two days later, held at night as was customary with Protestant burials,7 'all the English Artists who were then at Rome walk'd in procession with torches to the number of 18 or 20 - Banks the sculptor read the Service'.8  Apart from his watercolour views, Jones records Pars making copies of Reni's Aurora in April 1778 (Jones believed this went to the Bishop of Derry) and of Titian's Danae in the Capo di Monte in October 1780. He also painted portraits in oils; in February 1780 he was painting a whole-length of John Coxe Hippisley9 and in July 1781 he was finishing a portrait of the marchesa Santa Marco in Naples. In February 1781 James Irvine commented that 'Pars has painted some very good portraits'.10  His death came unexpectedly, as Jones (who had first heard of it on 2 November 1782) described : 'having been with an English Gentleman at Tivoli making a Drawing at a particular Spot there called the Grotto of Neptune, he imprudently sat the whole time with his feet in the water - being taken with a fit of shivering he was wrapt up in a blanket and sent off immediately to Rome', where four days later he died of suffocation'.11 Jones was left to reflect that 'though he was rather hasty and sometimes indeed Violent in his temper', Pars had been 'a warm and sincere friend'.


Parsons appears to have been a rather weak character, but with pronounced poetical ambitions and a radical conscience. He was in Italy by 1784 when he may have been in Parma1 before coming to Florence, where with Bertie Greatheed and Robert Merry he contributed verses to the Arno Miscellany published in 1784. Parsons was in Milan early in 1785 when the Piozzis first met him and in June he was one of the group of Englishmen staying at Megit's in Florence gathered round Bertie Greatheed, Robert Merry and the Piozzis.2 Parsons became a major contributor to their Florentine Miscellany, an anthology of English and Italian verse published in Florence in 1785 (see Hester Piozzi). Henry Quin noticed Parsons in Rome sometime between December 1785 and April 1786.3 Mrs Piozzi thought her 'amiable Friend' Mr Parsons would be back in England by the autumn of 1786; he was in Bern in July4 and in London by October.5 He published A Poetical Tour in the years 1784, 1785 and 1786. By a Member of the Arcadian Society at Rome [1787]. Parsons later returned to Florence, but he was in Weimar in 1790.6
A former chorister at Westminster Abbey, Parsons went to Italy to improve his voice. In November 1770 he told Charles Burney in Rome that he had studied at one of the Conservatories in Naples where he had learned nothing; Burney arranged for him to be taught composition by Rinaldo di Capua and singing by Santarelli in Rome.1 He may have been the William Parsons noted in Rome in 1772 by William Young.2 By September 1775 he had arrived in Florence where he taught the young Maria Hadfield (later Mrs Cosway), to whom he eventually proposed marriage. He was in London by 5 November 1775 when he wrote to Humphry.3 He wrote to Maria's mother from London on 4 February 1777 asking why her daughter had not responded to his proposal of marriage, and on 8 March Mrs Hadfield forwarded his letter to Maria (who was apparently then in Rome) with the injunction to be careful before making up her mind.4


The Mr Partridge in Leghorn, known to various English travellers between 1778 and 1796,1 was presumably James Partridge, otherwise known as a cultured Leghorn merchant who corrresponded with Lavater.2 James Partridge left Leghorn during the French invasion in 1796, but returned afterwards. He retired to a villa nearby, but committed suicide when his adopted children allowed his business to flounder. Mariana Starke quoted a letter dated 16 October 1799 from Mr Partridge, 'one of the longest established and most respectable Merchants at Leghorn'.3

William Theed met him between Paris and Lyons in March 1790 and wrote that Passmore was 'a west countryman from Exeter or some where near it. He had been to Genoa fourteen or fifteen months and had there sold a vessel' (Theed letters MSS, 27 Mar. 1790).

On the occasion of his marriage to Costantia Fontana in S.Nicola in Arcione Rome in May 17731 James Paston was described as the son of John Paston of the county of Norfolk, aged fifty-four, a Catholic who had left England for Rome in 1739; he had returned to London between June 1770 and September 1772.2 His wife's relations were descendants of the architect Carlo Fontana.3 Father Thorpe's letters (dates cited in brackets) supply some background to this marriage. In 1769, though the banns had already been published, it was called off due, it appeared, to the conduct of Paston's brother in England (27 May 1769*). Paston returned to England to renegotiate 'upon more sure terms ... than he did two years ago' (29 Jun. 1771). By March 1774 he was still not in possession of the family estate (9 Mar. 1774), and Thorpe referred to 'Little Paston' & his Italian Lady keeping 'a wishful look towards England' (10 Sep. 1774*). In 1776 his wife suffered a miscarriage (6 Apr. 1776). Thorpe recalled how 'during many years before his marriage [Paston] regularly retired in the six warmer months' to the Hermitage at Spoleto, 'where he wore the habit of his fellow hermits' (22 Sep. 1787; 2 Aug. 1788). He was well known at the 'Caffé Anglois' (12 Feb. 1774) and became friendly with an elderly English Missioner called Smith (6 Apr. 1776). He was in receipt of 'a gratuity of Ten Crowns per month from Cardl. York [Henry Benedict Stuart],' which was later paid to his widow together with an annuity 'from her sister-in-law, Throckmorton' (2 Aug. 1788) [Anna Maria, dau. of William Paston of Molland, Glos., who m. Geo.Throckmorton; Thorpe had previously mentioned Paston's two Throckmorton nephews, i.e. George and John (9 Mar. 1774)]. Thorpe first referred to 'the late Mr James Paston' on 2 August 1788.
This youth was fixt in a Counting House at Leghorn', Brinley Skinner reported, but on 13 April 1734 had gone to Rome; he was 'An English Roman Catholick of a very good Family and through whose channel I believe the Pretender's correspondences may pass at Leghorn'.1 He had returned to Leghorn by 22 May 1734.2
Thomas Patch, an intelligent and original artist with a sharp eye and a louche disposition, spent thirty-five years in Italy, mostly in Florence where he lived across the street from his friend Horace Mann. 'Though he does not live in my house', said Mann, 'he is never out of it a whole day'.1 Towards the end of his life Patch also had a country house, 'about a mile outside Florence'.2 Patch painted views of Florence, caricature groups of British travellers and he etched caricature heads, apart from studying 13th- and 14th-century Italian art, which was then generally neglected. He had 'came afoot' to Italy with Richard Dalton and was in Rome by 1747. From 1749-50 and 1752-5 he stayed at the Palazzo Zuccari, and in 1751 at the English Coffee House in the Piazza di Spagna; in 1749 he shared rooms with Matthew Brettingham, Joseph Wilton and Simon Vierpyl; in 1750 with Richard Dalton; in 1751-2 with Joshua Reynolds and in 1753-5 again with Vierpyl.3 Between 1750 and 1753 he worked in the studio of Joseph Vernet. In 1750-1 he had been commissioned by Lord Charlemont to paint views of Rome and Tivoli, and in 1752 he was supplying copies of paintings (which included coastal scenes by Vernet) to Ralph Howard through the agency of James Russel.4 He became a member of Charlemont's short-lived British Academy in 1753, and his quarrel with the Director did much to ensure its demise. In 1756 he successfully completed negotiations with the Muti family for the sale of a Claude to Sir William Lowther (NGS)5 but, during the negotiations, at Christmas 1755 he was banished from Rome 'by order of the Inquisition in 24 hours for Crime well known to the Holy Office, tis said to have proceed'd from some Confession his poor boy Girolamo made at his Death for ye Ease of his Conscience'6, which supports the assumption that he was expelled for some homosexual indiscretion. Patoun, in his 'Advice on Travel' of c.1766, warned his readers that 'A Certain Mr Patch at Florence is a -' (see above, p.lii). Patch moved to Florence with an introduction to Horace Mann who became his close friend. He lived in the Fondaci di Santo Spirito,7 and apart from a trip to Venice and Pola in 1760 (recorded in one of the Dunham Massey groups) and a visit to Rome in 1772,8 he spent the rest of his life there. He was elected to the Accademia del Disegno on 14 January 1759 and was made a conservadore on 18 April 1774.9 The 1760s were his most productive decade. He continued to paint decorative landscapes based on Vernet's works10 and under the influence of Giuseppe Zocchi he painted views of the Arno, the Piazza della Signoria and panoramic views of the city from the surrounding hills. But he became best known for his witty caricature groups, of which the earliest and finest are dated 1760 (Dunham Massey), and the largest, The Golden Asses, was painted in 1761 (known in two versions; Chatsworth and WSL). A few of Patch's figures have been identified through preparatory drawings11 and two series of etchings which were made between 1765 and 1770. It may have been Patch's intention to illustrate his Le Regole del Fisonomizare with the earlier etchings in the series. In his last dated caricature group of 1774 (Floors Castle) Patch appears holding a volume bearing this title. His cousin Gideon Caulet gives some indication of the book's contents: 'After seven years laborious Observation ... [Patch] has found out ye Means of knowing at sig[ht] what a man's profession was, in what Country he was born & in what situation ... what his religion was & to what sect of that religion he belong'd ... He taught in his Book the means by which a Painter might draw ye likeness of any Person tho' he had never seen him.' But, said Caulet, 'a French Duke stole the Manuscript [and] threw it in the fire'.12 Consequently the caricature groups appear to be the humorous product of substantial research. Patch's physiognomical studies were complemented with connoisseurship, which was financed by copying. In 1764 James Martin saw copies of 'Two Landskips painted by S Rosa & lately bought by Lord Spencer from the Acciajoli Family',13 and it would appear that he made uncommissioned copies of paintings by Rubens in the Pitti Palace for resale.14 He continued to deal, and by 1768 he owned Giambologna's Fata Morgana which he eventualy sold to an Englishman.15 In 1770, with the publication of The Life of Massaccio, he embarked on a plan to publish books of engravings after 'every celebrated author'. Volumes followed on Fra Bartolommeo, Giotto (both 1772) and the Baptistery doors by Ghiberti (1774).16 They were conceived as an explanation for those who 'are willing to reflect on the different stages of Painting', and today they provide a valuable record of a fresco cycle (now attributed to Aretino Spinello) destroyed by fire in 177117 (but of which Patch came to own some fragments),18 as well as furnishing documentation for dating the second set of Baptistery doors. Patch figured prominently as a connoisseur in Zoffany's Tribuna (Windsor), where he is shown discussing the Venus of Urbino with Horace Mann. In 1778 Patch suffered a stroke and on 9 January he still felt 'the effects of his cruel disorder, by a confusion of his head, more or less difficulty in his speech'.19 By the autumn Caulet found him 'much better than [he] expected'. Four years later Patch suffered a second stroke and he died in Florence 30 April 1782.20


A Scotchman in the King of Sardinia's service many years, who was now commander of the King's gallies ... a gallant and very worthy man, a very good officer, a great friend to the English in every respect, and yet a most excellent and faithful servant of the King of Sardinia' (Hervey (Aug.) Jnl., 16 Aug. 1747).



A Scottish gentleman of considerable learning and some taste in painting',1 Patoun made several tours in Italy, latterly as a knowledgable guide. But it appears to have been as a student of painting that he made his first protracted visit, of which only disjointed evidence survives. He was presumably the Dr Patoun in Naples in November 1761.2 He was first recorded in Rome in 1762, apparently on his own, 'a very great Critick in Painting', working 'most surprisingly in Miniature'.3 He was again in Rome in March 1763,4 and the following June was described as a Scotch physician 'of considerable learning' who had spent 'many months' in Rome and was then about to return to his home in Richmond.5 Patoun returned with Benjamin West via Florence, Parma, Genoa and Turin, to arrive in London on 20 August 1763.6  He soon returned to Italy, this time as a tutor to the young 9th Earl of Exeter and accompanied by a Mr Chambers, and it was largely on this experience that he was to compile his 'Advice on Travel' (see above, pp.xxxix-lii). They were in Turin in October 1763, leaving on the 12th for Florence on their way to Naples.7 On 16 October Exeter and Patoun were in Parma, and extracts from Patoun's account of the city have been published.8 James Martin met Chambers at dinner in Naples 31 December 1763, and on 15 January 1764 James Martin visited an unidentified painter's studio with Lord Exeter, Garrick and Patoun. Martin also mentioned a copy by Patoun of a Parmigianino Virgin and Child in the Capo di Monte, and of two Rests on the Flight into Egypt, one by Raphael, the other by Barocci, 'a most excellent copy' from the sketch in the Accademia di S.Luca.9 On 5 June 1764 Patoun left Rome with Lord Exeter and Chambers for Florence,10 where 'Guglielmo Patoun, Scozzeso' was elected to the Accademia del Disegno on 8 July 1764.11 On 17 December 1765 Patoun was granted permission to export twenty paintings via Civitavecchia, and on 21 December a 'Lodovico Chambers', perhaps his companion Chambers, exported eighteen paintings (including two by Salvator Rosa).12  In 1768 Patoun accompanied Sir Gregory Turner and Richard Jodrell to Italy. Turner told his uncle they had passed through Milan, Parma, Reggio, Modena and Bologna 'in all of which towns I saw several fine original pictures, as Mr Patoun tells me, for I do not pretend to be a judge myself'.13 In October 1768 they attended the dinner in Florence held to celebrate Horace Mann's investiture with the Order of the Bath.14 Turner, Jodrell and Patoun were dining with Lord Exeter (who had returned to Italy) in Naples on 29 November and were still together in January and February 1769 in Rome. Jodrell then stayed in Rome while Turner and Patoun travelled north, arriving in Venice on 11 March.15 In April they were in Vienna. Jodrell meanwhile was following a course of antiquities in Rome under Colin Morison with William Drake.16 In 1773-4 Patoun accompanied a somewhat depressed Lord Clive (Robert Clive of India) to Italy on his brief tour undertaken to form a collection of pictures (see Clive). Thomas Jenkins mentioned him buying pictures (including a Tintoretto) in Rome in January 1774.17 Patoun and Clive were in Rome in March, but had left by April. He was conceivably the 'Patton cav. inglese' who commissioned a copy of a Rosso Fiorentino Angel in the Uffizi in January 1774.18  In October 1775 Patoun was travelling to Naples with the 2nd Earl of Powis, whom he was said to 'overcloud' to the extent that they were known as 'Mr Powys and Lord Patoun'; Father Thorpe now described Patoun as 'the celebrated Scots Connoisseur',19 see Powis. Of Patoun's original paintings, James Byres owned a Portrait of a Frascatan Girl 'by W. Patoun'20 and a Female Head 'by Dr Patune'.21 In England Patoun lived at Richmond and was apparently consulted on matters of painting by Richard Cambridge, Daniel Wray and Lord Hardwicke.22 Patoun's collections were dispersed at Christie's in 1783 (14-15, 26-28 Mar.). A portrait of 'Robert Patoune', shown with his arm resting on a book inscribed L. Da Vinci, is attributed to Nathaniel Dance (priv. coll.).23
After completing his education in Germany, Patteson had succeeded to his uncle's wool business in Norwich at the age of nineteen. Four years later he set off on his grand tour which he described in a series of letters to his mother.1 They reveal him as affectionate and sensitive, but increasingly critical and homesick.  He first made some business contacts in Milan, but found that 'all Business is despised by the nobility in Italy, & that the People we send to are in the second & third class of those in Trade' (22 Nov. 1778). He spent on clothes, for 'he would be a fool who offends in his appearance to save a few pounds especially as a man travels but once in his life' (11 Dec. 1778). In Florence he was delighted to pay his 'devoirs to the Venus de Medici' (16 Jan. 1779); in Rome he was 'struck deaf & dumb with St Peter's' (1 Mar. 1779) and at Naples 'Vesuvius answered my Expectations, nay surpassed them' (12 Apr.). He visited Pompeii and Herculaneum, although he didn't 'think them worthy objects to take a man out of his way' (31 Mar. 1779). While he was in Naples it appears he met Thomas Bowdler, who had been discouraged by William Hamilton from making an expedition to Sicily in March. They were in Rome together for Holy Week, the ceremonies marred by the Pope's illness, to the extent that Patteson wrote he would have been 'much better pleased to see a Guild day according to ancient Custom in our City of Norwich' (12 Apr. 1779). In Rome Patteson and Bowdler had met Rowland Burdon, Henry Greswolde Lewis, John Stewart of Allanbank and the young architect John Soane who, characteristically, immediately began to propose new plans for the Patteson home at Norwich. Together they all resolved to go to Sicily later in April. They sailed from Naples on 21 April and reached Palermo on the 29th. Bowdler and Stewart then went off separately, while the other four took Patrick Brydone's Tour as their guidebook and, for protection in that inhospitable island, 'a Guard who cut a tremendous Figure, armed cap a pee his cap of crimson Velvet laced with silver' (23 May). They were five days at Girgenti and saw Segesta and Trapani. Patteson and Lewis viewed 'these venerable Ruins with less Passion [than Soane and Burdon] & [got] many a good laugh against the others when they happen to admire a modern Arch for an ancient one & such like' (11 Jun. 1779). At the end of May they made a brief excursion to Malta, returning to Sicily on 4 June. They were all back in Naples by the beginning of July and Patteson then began his return journey. In Rome, he declined his mother's request to sit for his portrait: 'I saw so many bad Pictures of Englishmen that I would not be among the number of those who pay 30 guineas at Rome for what they could have as well if not better done for 10 or 15 in London' (Jul. 1779). At the end of August he again met Burdon and Soane at Brescia. By the time he reached Turin his spirits were beginning to flag: Italy, he wrote 'was a Country believe me not worth leaving old England for to any but an Artist, or mad Enthusiast after Antiquities' (25 Sep. 1779). Patteson bought some 'Roman Curiosities', but it is not clear how many of his pictures (several of which are now in Norwich Castle Museum) were bought during his tour. After his return he wrote to Soane (1 Apr. 1780): 'Pray let Moore [Jacob More] do me the picture & recommend its Execution al sommo'.2 In 1787 More apologised to him for the delay in painting a companion to a Vesuvius, but he was working on a View of Lake Albano, which he hoped would please.3
General Pattison served the Republic of Venice, where he and his wife were based for some four years. His letters from Italy to his brother Nathaniel1 describe his constant travelling within the Veneto and his military duties, which also had their social side. From Verona on 16 November 1769 he wrote of 'such an inundation of of Marcheses, Contes, Contessa's etc. etc. that every day has been spent in receiving and returning visits'. In March 1770 he was given a picture by Cignaroli with the arms of Verona on the frame (21 Mar.); his letters show he was an intelligent tourist as his duties permitted, although at Bassano the 'most celebrated works of the great painter Giacomo da Ponte [Jacopo Bassano]' made him feel a strong urge 'to commit sacrilege'.  In August 1770 he was asked to inspect Venetian establishments in Dalmatia, Albania and the Levant. He left Venice in September 1770 and travelled leisurely to Naples. On 6 October he was reported in Florence,2 where Horace Mann gave him an introduction to Cardinal Albani.3 He spent most of November in Rome and then spent two months in Naples, where he arrived in December.4 He explored Calabria before going on to Corfu in April 1771. On completing his tour of inspection, he returned to Venice in October 1771. He was last recorded there ('con moglie') in March 1772.5 In the posthumous sale of Pattison's London mansion in 1805 (Christie's, 24 May) there were a number of Venetian pictures, including five paintings by Guardi.6



Paul, described as 'the Consul of Zant', was in Venice on 5 May 1705;1 his re-appointment as consul was announced in 1715.2 He was possibly the James Paul of Dover who arrived in Padua on 15 June 1705 with Daniel Paul.3
The Joshua Paul who had arrived at Leghorn by 28 November 1733,1 was presumably the Mr Paul, an Irishman related to 'one Colonel Paul formerly in the Guards', who had arrived at Leghorn on 20 November.2 On 4 February 1734 Richard Pococke described having met in Rome 'Mr Paul Mr Christmas's nephew',3 and a Mr Paul arrived in Florence on 21 July 1734 from Rome, accompanied by Stewart and William Fauquier.4





The John Peachey who arrived in Venice with William Lockart and Thomas Clarke on 17 May 17701 was presumably also the John Peachey who had completed a grand tour 'shortly before' acquiring a book of views of Rome (Eton Coll.) from William Locke in 1777.2

Pearce's itinerary is in part recorded among his drawings (VAM).1 He drew the Maison Carrée in Nimes in August 1723, and a doorcase in the via Ghibellina in Florence in the following month. In Florence he was in contact with Alessandro Galilei with whom he was negotiating for statues for 'Mr Conolly' (of Castletown, co.Kildare?), and for drawings for 'the Palace'.2 From Bologna he went to Venice where, on 18 April 1724, he annotated his copy of the Quattro Libri on visiting the Carita. He continued these annotations on his subsequent tour of the Veneto. His copy of the Quattro Libri (VAM) shows him to have been sensitive to the settings of Palladio's buildings, and suggests that he had studied Palladio before setting out on his travels. When he wrote to his friend Bysse Molesworth from Geneva on 18 May 1724, on his way home, he referred to his recent visit to Bysse's brother John, then envoy extraordinary in Turin.3


Peerson, 'a very curious young man', was an American who came to Florence from Venice with Mrs Newnham in May 1796. 'He has been very long at Paris', wrote Betsey Wynne, 'and means to return. He seems to be a great partisan of the French. He had very free manners with young ladies'.1 'Pearsale Americano' with 'Lady Newkham' [Mrs Newnham] arrived in Venice on 17 June 1796.2 'Madama Newham [Newenham?] e Monsieur Pensons inglesi' were in Venice on 18 February 1791, doubtless the same, see Mrs Newnham. He may also have been the 'Pearce Colonello Americano' leaving Padua on 5 June 1796.
By December 1774 Peirse was in Rome,1 where Batoni painted his portrait, dated 1775 (Rome, Gall. Naz. d'Arte Antica; Clarke/Bowron 384). In Rome he met Lord George Augustus Henry Cavendish, his future brother-in-law Lord Monson and Lewis Thomas Watson, with whom he travelled to Naples early in January.2 He later met Romney in Venice (probably in March), and on his return journey he was able to assist the painter in Paris in June.3
Horatio Nelson told William Hamilton that Peirson was 'to return to Naples, where he is going to reestablish his health ... Col. Wauchop, of the 50th Regt., in which Mr Peirson was a volunteer and has now a commission, has great regard for him, as had Col. [William] Villette at Bastia' (Morrison, 1:193, no.245; Leghorn, 31 Aug. 1794).
Pelham succeeded to the Brocklesby estates at the age of fourteen, and after leaving Eton set out on his travels, his guardians making him an allowance of £2,000 a year. He spent a year in Italy, arriving in Venice with his tutor, Captain Bruyers, on 3 May 1768.1 On 21 October 1768 they attended the dinner in Florence given to celebrate Horace Mann's receipt of the Order of the Bath.2 In Rome Pelham met and patronised the sculptor J.F. Nollekens; his marble bust (with many other works by Nollekens) remains at Brocklesby.3 Pelham is recorded at Naples in March 1769 and as leaving Venice in May, on each occasion with Bruyers.4
Rome, Venice (Apr.), Padua (16 Jun.)Pelham, 'a relation of Lord Herbert's[?]', was noticed in Turin, Rome, Naples and Venice between October 1711 and April 1712. He travelled from Rome to Venice with Charles Baldwyn and Burrell Massingberd1 and was presumably the 'H. Pelham' in Padua on 16 June 1712.2
A very good-natured little man', Pelham travelled on the Continent with John Milbanke (whom he had met in The Hague in 1746), 'a mighty good-natured and sensible young man'.1 They had arrived in Naples in December 17492 and by the new year they were in Rome.3 Pelham's portrait was painted in Rome by Gavin Hamilton who later, in 1777 (during Pelham's son's visit to Rome), sent him another smaller picture, both to make amends for what he then thought a bad portrait and to thank him for his kindness and patronage.4 Pelham and Milbanke spent most time in Florence, staying at Hadfield's. Horace Mann first mentions them together in February 1750; they supped together regularly and in June they spent a week at Pisa. Pelham's affection for the Countess Acciaioli delayed their return home until August. They were in London by 11 November.5
Pelham had written to his father from Madrid in July 1776 describing his proposed tour of Italy, which was to last a year.1 He came to Turin in February 1777 with an unidentified 'young Spence', whom he called 'giddy & unsettled at thirty' and whom he left there (5 Feb., 4 Mar. 1777). In Rome he was presented to the Duke of Gloucester and he spent much time with Lord John Pelham Clinton. Pelham thought Rome too much resembled Brighthelmstone with its surfeit of some seventy English visitors (1 Apr.), and he was glad to leave after Holy Week. Rather than follow an antiquarian whose knowledge 'acquired without any natural Taste will be very ennuyant' (1 Apr.), he was guided by the opinions of Mengs 'who is equally sensible on every other subject as painting' and with whom he was hoping to dine 'at least once a week' together with the Spanish Ambassador Azara [subsequently Mengs's biographer] (8 Apr.). It was James Byres, however, who guided Pelham, Lord John Pelham Clinton and Lord Dalrymple ('much the most agreeable Englishman that I know in Italy'; 3 May) round Tivoli, Frascati and Albani (16 Apr.). Pelham was not unduly concerned to buy works of art and he explained that 'I am not so great an Antiquarian to admire gems merely from ye Antiquity & shall therefore employ Piclar [Pichler] in copying some' (16 Apr.).  He arrived in Naples on 1 May, having taken two days for his journey from Rome; 'the generality of English perform this journey without stopping [but] ... I did not want to loose any of the Country by travelling in the Night' (3 May). He enjoyed Naples ('the most agreeable place I have ever been in'), where he consorted with Sir James Long, Dr Alexander Drummond and Lord Tylney (of whom, wrote Pelham's father on 6 June, 'I'm sure you would not keep company with any where but in Italy'). Henry Swinburne recorded visiting Pompeii with Pelham by 25 February 1777 (evidently in error), and making other visits with him to Capri and Ischia in May and June.2 Pelham's letters indicate that these visits took place in May. Returning to Rome late in June, Pelham found the Piazza di Spagna 'quite deserted & the rest of the town seems after Naples as if it were uninhabited' (28 Jun.). 'My mornings are employed in learning Italian & the History of Italy; I dine at home excepting the days I go to Card Bernis & the Spanish Minister, play at Chess with old Mr Beyres [Patrick Byres] Father to the Antiquarian after dinner, walk in the cool of the Evening & at night visit' (26 Jul.). On 30 July he reported he had had his portrait 'engraved on a Stone for Ld Grantham [Thomas Robinson, 2nd Baron Grantham], it is reckoned exceedingly like tho' the hair is in the Antique style'. He dined with Gavin Hamilton who, though 'very indolent for some years' had just painted his portrait of the 8th Duke of Hamilton and Dr John Moore and seemed 'to be very willing to return to paint with more Ardour than he had before' (2 Aug.). Pelham found the summer water festival in the Piazza Navona 'the most ridiculous entertainment' (9 Aug.).  Early in September he went to Florence, where his reception by Horace Mann was 'most polite & flattering'. He stayed, as his father had done, at Hadfield's and he also employed his father's former Italian language teacher, the Abbé Pellori (7 Sep.). He met a Signor Molini who 'will sell me all kind of English things ... from Birmingham' and dined with Lord and Lady Cowper. Perhaps tactlessly, he told his father he had met Madame Acciaioli (13 Sep.) and he subsequently met the courier who had gone with his father from into Germany & England - 'he serves now as a Valet de Place at Florence' (27 Sep.). On 20 September he described the opera at Lucca, where Pacchiarotti seemed to sing 'with so much Pain to himself' that Pelham could not 'attend to him in the manner yt his voice deserves; & his Figure is bad'. On 28 September he set out for Bologna, where he met the celebrated singer Farinelli who wore 'his own gray hair dressed like the old whigs that my Father has in yt Portrait at Newcastle-House & his cloathes of the same fashion' (2 Oct.). In Parma he was struck by Correggio and subscribed to the engravings of his works by Varend, and in Venice he observed 'members of the two noble Senates strolling about till four or five in the Morning & with difficulty keeping their eyes open by the assistance of strong Coffee' (23 Oct.). He left Milan with Pelham Clinton on 26 November for Munich and Vienna and was back in England by 28 March 1778. Pelham had not been impressed with the Italians, whom he described as 'either the most ignorant, or the most artful men that can be seen, & from whose conversation you can not gain any new Idea or Improvement'; although Italy was 'worth the Notice of every Man of reading as the seat of so many interesting transactions', in every other respect 'it is the worst Country, that a young man can go to' (3 May). Italy, he concluded, 'would be a most delightful Country if there were not so many Italians' (30 Jul.).  In 1792 he escorted the Duchess of Devonshire and her friend Lady Elizabeth Foster to Italy, see Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire. The responsibility made him ill, and in Florence he declined to accompany them home. 'It certainly was wise in him to decline the embarrassment of a tedious, troublesome journey with them', wrote Lady Webster; 'I think it is a bad thing for him, as he imputes his late long illness entirely to the worry he suffered from both of them in conducting them from Lausanne to Florence'. She anticipated meeting Pelham and Henry Swinburne the younger, whom he had met in Naples, in the Val d'Aosta in July.3

Lord John Pelham Clinton arrived in Florence in October 1776, and was presented to the Grand Duke on the 20th by Horace Mann.1 He was at Naples in January 1777 and the following month visited Pompeii with Henry Swinburne, Sir Thomas Gascoigne and a Mr Stanley.2 Thomas Pelham's letters describe his subsequent movements;3 by 29 March Lord John had been some time in Rome '& has not as yet fixed any time for his departure'; in April they twice visited Tivoli, embarked on a course of antiquities with James Byres and visited the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester at Civitavecchia. At the end of the month Pelham left for Naples where he heard in June that Lord John had made a romantic attachment in Rome. By 28 June Lord John had gone to Florence for the summer; he was in Pisa on 9 August and in Milan on 7 September. He was expected in Venice with the Marquess of Graham in October, en route for Vienna, but on 23 October he was waiting for Pelham in Milan (Graham having gone on to Venice). After they met, Lord John intended spending a few days in Venice then rejoining Pelham in Munich, but they eventually left Milan together on 26 November.

At the age of seventeen Lord Pembroke set out for the Continent and, after spending some time in France and Germany, he arrived in Italy early in 1753.1 During his first four months in Italy he was accompanied by a tutor, Antoine des Cloires. He reached Venice on 7 March, Lord Essex writing that he [Pembroke] 'proposes staying here but a week and then we shall set off together for Rome, we propose going by Padoua, Vincense, and Verone'.2 By 14 April Essex, and presumably Pembroke, were settled in Rome,3 where Pembroke sat to Batoni (Wilton; Clark/Bowron 175) and commissioned a copy of the Dying Gladiator from Vierpyl.4 In June Pembroke was in Florence. With Horace Mann and Lord Tylney he visited Pisa on 17 June5 and on 8 August the same party were reported to have left Siena to return to Florence6 where the 'comtessa' La Rena was soon Pembroke's mistress.7 By October 1753 a case of paintings sent from Milan to Turin was awaiting his instructions.8 In 1754, with Lords Bolingbroke, Essex and Thanet, he was said to have been in Tivoli observing Richard Wilson drawing9 and a distinguished group of Wilsons at Wilton confirms his admiration for this artist. On 1 September 1754 he arrived with La Rena in Genoa from Florence, and he then sailed with Augustus Hervey to Leghorn, arriving on 16 September and setting off directly for Florence.10 He returned to England in December 1755, having spent time in Switzerland and France. On his second visit, principally occasioned by the wish to meet General Paoli in Corsica, Pembroke travelled with Captain Charles Medows (later Lord Manvers) and they left Paris in November 1768.11 Pembroke was in Rome in November12 and stayed in Naples between 13 December and 17 January 1769.13 He was a close friend of William Hamilton, but there were, nonetheless, diplomatic difficulties over his visit to Corsica (and Pembroke had returned briefly to Rome in March14). The French ambassador in Naples had expressed surprise that 'a Peer of England, a General Officer shou'd be going to Corsica merely from a motive of private curiosity'.15 Pembroke eventually went on 12 April, accompanied by Sir Thomas Tancred and the marchese Fagnani, and he met Paoli, of whom he commissioned a portrait from a painter he had taken with him.16 On their return they spent two days in Florence before setting out for Venice,17 where Pembroke and Tancred arrived on 3 May.18 Horace Walpole (who was no admirer) alleged that Pembroke carried off a young Venetian bride on her wedding night.19 Pembroke returned to Florence early in June before returning home via Turin and Milan.20  On his third visit, occasioned by the poor health of his daughter Charlotte, Pembroke left London on 20 October 1783.21 The entire family went by different routes to the south of France where Charlotte died at Aix on 21 April 1784. Pembroke then set off on his own for Italy, according to Horace Walpole in pursuit of an Italian actress, possibly Clementina Chiavacci.22 His surviving letters to his son from Italy principally address English affairs. In January 1785 he had returned to Naples from a visit to Sicily, condemning Brydone's Tour through Sicily as an unreliable and superficial guide.23 He was intending to return home in the summer of 1785 and to sail with Captain Blankett to Gibraltar. He returned to Florence, but then sailed with Blankett from Leghorn to Naples in September 1785, only to return to Rome and go on to Florence in October. In January 1786 he was staying in the Hotel Minerva in Rome.24 On 30 June 1786 John Udny wrote from Leghorn that Pembroke had left for England 'a few weeks ago',25 but his journey was leisurely, via Lisbon, Madrid and Paris, and he arrived back in England in the summer of 1787. On his last visit to Italy in 1789, Pembroke found Venice in January 'frozen, & this country another Holland; the Lagunes Ice, & covered with people & carriages, etc.'26 He tried to meet his (illegitimate) son, Augustus Reebkomp/Montgomery, then commanding officer of the Mercury, at Leghorn. Pembroke was a difficult man and his domestic life was fractious, but in 1779 he took the trouble to give vigorous and stimulating instructions to his son concerning travel in Italy.27 'At Parma, I know nothing half as curious as the Arch Dss. [Maria Amelia]. I had rather see her than than all the Paintings of Correggio put together. ... At Florence, Ten Thousand Things. Examine attentively the superb Chapel where repose the Medicis. ... Go every morning to the Gallery ... At Terni, in God's name go and see the Cataract of the Nera ... Naples & its Environs are inexhaustible ... Mind to have an order to see the Satyr f-g the Goat'. Another set of instructions28 were somewhat hypocritical: 'Avoid Drink, Gaming, & all improper Connections, & move away directly, if necessary on their account'.

Penn inherited considerable wealth from Pennsylvania in the form of compensation for unsettled lands and a government annuity. His father had had a 'very great and Eligant' collection of pictures in Boston, which included 'several copies'.1 John Penn was in Florence in 17902 and in Rome in 1791, when he commissioned a number of works from British artists. On 14 May 1791 that year Hewetson told George Cumberland that Penn's 'vast fortune and plyable disposition has procured some considerable commissions for some of your friends, that is to say, Mr Grignion, Mr Deare, Mr Fagan & Mr Robinson. Fagan assures me that Mr Deare's share of the American Prize amounts to at least £400 Sterl'.3 Penn commissioned Grignion to make drawings 'of the most celebrated Greek marbles of a Colossal size, or at least as large as the originals'.4 Grignion had discovered that Penn's 'very unpromising manner' concealed 'a very refind taste and great classic knowledge'.5 The same letter described other aspects of Penn's patronage: he had sat for his bust to Deare (Eton Coll.), from whom he commissioned a relief of The Landing of Julius Caesar (Stoke Manor)6 and a chimneypiece, and had also taken the sculptor to Naples; he had bought a copy of a Domenichino from Fagan (although 'copies of old Pictures were not things he seemed much anxious about'), and three old masters from Hugh Robinson.

Edward Pennant was living 'in some comfort' at Florence when in August 1765 he met Boswell who thought him 'a most absurd mortal'.1 He was conceivably the Edward Pennant who arrived in Venice on 14 July 1773.2

Richard Pennant was in Italy with his brother John, and tutor, John Hall. In June 1756 they were in Turin bearing a letter of introduction from Lord Holderness to the 2nd Earl of Bristol [see George Hervey] which, however, they did not present until the eve of their departure.1 Horace Mann in Florence introduced them to Cardinal Albani in Rome,2 and the three stayed in Venice between 18 May and 20 June 1757.3

Mr Pennington' was at Pompeii on 22 January 1779 with Thomas Pitt (later Lord Camelford), Sir William Molesworth and John Soane.1 Later that year Soane undertook to find a painting of Vesuvius for 'W. Pennington'.2 Pennington was in a party dining with Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) in Naples on 27 and 28 August 1779, on which day he left Naples with Pitt.3
Penny was said to have studied under Benefial in Rome (DNB). In July 1741 Richard Dalton, then studying in Rome under Masucci, referred to 'Mr Penee one of our fellow students that was here ... a well behaved young fellow'.1 Penny visited the antiquary Francesco Gaburri in Florence (presumably before 1741 when Gaburri stopped writing).2 In December 1741 he was in Bologna negotiating with commendable discretion the purchase for Sir Robert Walpole of a Domenichino Madonna and Child owned by Francesco Zambeccari; Penny also claimed that he could have had a Domenichino Sybil from the Casa Ratta, and in January 1742 he sent Horace Mann a Magdalen by Flaminio Torri.3 Penny was in Venice, apparently in January 1742.4 He returned to England in 1743.5
Penrose served as private secretary to William Wyndham, British envoy to the Grand Duke of Tuscany:1 one of his first duties was to christen Lady Webster's daughter, born in Florence on 12 June 1794.2 From 1796 he was acting as Lord Holland's agent, principally with the French painters Gauffier and Fabre; in 1798 he sat to Gauffier (Minneapolis; drawing in the Museu Nacional de Arte Antiga, Lisbon) who made, he thought 'a good picture'. He had returned (presumably briefly) to England in 1797; he was in Venice on 23 January, leaving the same night for London.3 In July 1799 Wyndham was excusing Penrose's behaviour to Sir William Hamilton; Wyndham had always found him to be 'most loyal and gentlemanly', yet he had upset the Hamiltons, probably because of malicious gossip.4 Between May and October 1800 Penrose acted as chargé d'affaires in Wyndham's absence, but his tenure was ended by the French invasion. Later, in October 1801, he wrote from Udine to Lady Holland (as Lady Webster had then become) seeking assistance to obtain a position as a secretary of legation in Tuscany, but without success. Penrose then returned to Oxford to resume his studies.
Penton arrived in Italy in 1758 having sailed from Toulon with Augustus Hervey,1 who described him as 'a gentleman of fortune'. His portrait was drawn in crayons in Rome in 1759 at the request of and for his friend Sir John Dick.2  In November 1793 'Mr Penton the Member for Winchester' was in Naples suffering from gout,3 and it was possibly his wife who was introduced as 'Mrs Benton' to Angelica Kauffman in Rome by Emma Hamilton (from Naples in December) and who sat to Angelica in 1794.4

After 'an astonishing journey over the Alps' full of the 'greatest sublimity and beauty', Lucas Pepys came to Turin in October 1767. He was travelling with William Roe and William Watson. His brother, Sir William Pepys, had asked him to write home assuming complete ignorance on the part of the reader, and Lucas's twelve letters provide a full description of his tour.1 The King's Palace at Turin he found 'far superior to Versailles for richness and elegance of furniture', and the King's physician obliged him by providing letters of introductiuon to 'the principal medical people in Italy'. Genoa, though a poor republic, had many very rich families whose 'passion is to have fine palaces'. At Pavia he found the German Sergeants speaking 'worse Italian than ourselves', and he compared the University architecturally to St John's College, Oxford. Passing through Piacenza, Parma, Modena and Bologna he arrived in Florence (his party being listed as 'Peches', 'Ro' and 'Guascon').2  He stayed at Hadfield's where 'almost all the English live ... everybody pays 2/6 a day for his apartment, not quite 4/- for his dinner, 8d his breakfast or tea, 1/- fire, and if any chooses supper, it is 1/6'. He described a typical day: up at 7.30 a.m., the Italian master looks over translations, breakfast and out by 9, 9 to 1 seeing things, from 1 to 3 'dressing &c', dinner from 3 to 5 with all the English, Italian master 5 to 7, then supper, translations and discussions. He compared the Gallery with that at Oxford and discovered the apartments underneath it where the Florentine Marbles are made ('pictures in different coloured stones'). His appreciation of the statuary ('which far exceeded all my expectations') was much enhanced by his anatomical knowledge and by touch. He attended Horace Mann's conversazioni every Monday, and was visited by Lord Cowper. Bagni he considered 'the Brighthelmstone of Italy'. At Leghorn, 'well built and populous', he found seventeen established English Houses, although trade was declining with only half the usual number of ships in the harbour. Siena was 'a miserable, poor, large city', and Lake Bolsena 'next in point of beauty to Loch Lomond and Loch Ness'. On their way to Naples they spent four days in Rome (where they saw Cardinal York celebrating the Christmas Mass).  At Naples, 'one of the most delightful spots in the world', William Hamilton introduced them to the King whose new palace was under construction at Caserta; they climbed Vesuvius and saw the theatre at Herculaneum '100 feet below the surface [with a] larva [deposit] near 80 feet in thickness'. They were back in Rome for the Carnival and Pepys described the Masquerades and the Corso at length; he noticed only eighteen English visitors (perhaps because of the ensuing Election)-'usually in Lent there are near 40'-and described their activities ('getting into company') with some cynicism. He described his routine at Rome: 'Up at 7, shave, put on shirt and Frock dress ... Breakfast and out by nine: ... From 9 to 1/2 after 1, feasting the eye ... Return and dine a little before 2 and after 2 hours repose, for selves and horses; about 4 o'clock sally out again till it is dark. We drink tea, and afterwards each of us retires ... and studies for two or three hours, a little before 10 we meet and eat an egg or some trifling thing for supper and about 11 move off to bed'. His monthly expenses were £10 each for coach and lodgings ('the best in Rome'), £2 'Firing', and 3s a head for Dinner. 'We don't spend a guinea a day apeice' he reflected, adding that 'the great expence of travelling in Italy is a joke - an Economist may do great things here for little money'. Pepys found his expectations of Rome too high 'except in the article of statuary'. Well versed in antiquity ('I have read the six last books of Virgil lately'), his greatest pleasure was to tread the same floor as Cicero, 'a kind of delightful dream ... which cannot be expressed'.  The party travelled north through Terni, Loreto and Ancona to Venice, where they arrived on 22 March 1768.3 Pepys observed how unfortunate it was that the Venetian school of painters 'whose chief merit consisted in the excellence of their colouring should have been established at Venice, the only place perhaps in Italy, where their perfection in colouring could have suffered from a moist damp air'. He was able to talk with the distinguished Venetian physician, Morgagni, but a week was sufficient for them to attend thoroughly to the 'objects of sight'. They left Venice on 28 March and early in April crossed the Brenner Pass.
Perceval's tour of Italy1 lasted little more than six months, in the course of which he bought and commissioned works of art intended for 'the use of an accademy of painters which he purposed to forward the erecting in Ireland'. But his schemes were not to be realised, for he suffered the great misfortune of having both consignments of his Italian acquisitions captured at sea by French privateers (in 1707 and 1709) - all of his 'valuable collection of books, paintings, statues antiquities, drafts and musick he had made abroad, things that he took much delight in and enter'd into the study of in Italy'.  He had set out from England in July 1705 (during the War of the Spanish Succession) with his close friend Francis Clerke. They spent some time in Utrecht and Hanover before arriving in Padua on 9 October 1706.2 They visited Venice and proceeded to Rome, where Perceval employed Ficoroni as his antiquary,3 and impressed the young James Gibbs who apparently guided his studies in architecture. Gibbs later told him 'I believe there will come to Rome very few that will leave such a notable character behind them'. The painters Edward Gouge and Henry Trench also attended Perceval, who sat to Vincenzo Felici for his marble bust which is signed and dated Rome 1707 (NPG). His other acquisitions, as described in his correspondence, included copies of 'the painters' heads' (presumably those from the Medici gallery), copies by Gouge of paintings by the Carracci in the Farnese gallery, unspecified works by Trench, and '24 heads and 3 statues' from Massimiliano Soldani (finished by November 1707). Besides paintings and sculpture, he acquired books, medals, drawings, ivories (he mentioned 'the ivory Caesar's heads which I bought at Rome'), and music. A competent player of the harpsichord, Perceval participated in concerts in Rome. Late in March 1707 it took the travellers five days to travel from Rome to Florence.4 Perceval was received with particular courtesy by the Grand Duke Cosimo III (who had previously been received in Ireland by Perceval's relations) and was even permitted to use the Duke's camerero, Laurenzo Magnolfi, as his agent for the works of art he was commissioning in Italy. Clerke described their subsequent journey in a letter written from Geneva on 28 May 1707.4 They visited Leghorn, spending two days with the Protestant chaplain Dr Basil Kennett, Clerke observing that 'our English factory contributes more to make [Leghorn] flourishing than any others in it'. They left Leghorn by sea for Genoa but, after a skirmish with a privateer commanded by a Neapolitan, they were forced to put in at Lerici and complete their journey by mule. Clerke thought Genoa 'the most extraordinary of any place I have seen next to Venice, and the buildings generaly the finest in Italy. The woemen are very pretty'. They also met there Lord Peterborough and his son Captain Henry Mordaunt. From Genoa they went on to spend 'an agreeable fortnight' in Turin. By the end of May they were in Geneva, Perceval relieved to be in 'a protestant Country, after spending so much time in Popish ones where he could joyn in no publick worship' and happy to find himself preserved 'from the corruptions which youth at such distance from home is apt to fall into by reason of the lycensiousness of manners that reigns abroad, and the liberties that strangers in particular are allow'd to take provided they disturb not the government'.5
?1781-3 (he wrote to his father William Perceval from Paris, 9 Feb. 1781, concerning a proposed visit to Italy; he had returned to Dublin by 1783; PRO NI, D906/139).
Never of robust health, Lord Algernon was sent abroad straight from Eton in the care of Louis Dutens (who explained 'he as a nobleman, and I as an ex-minister of the King of England at the court of Turin').1 They were in France together in 1766, and Dutens had found his young charge 'lively and gay'; one who did not dislike 'parade and splendour, and evinced great taste in his expenditure'. They travelled through France and came to Italy through Alessandria and Genoa. By 16 October they had reached Florence, where they attended the dinner given to celebrate Horace Mann's investiture with the Order of the Bath on the 21st, before leaving on 11 November for Rome.2  They were in Rome when Clement XIII died (3 February 1769). In March they paid a short visit to Naples, where they arrived with Charles Anderson Pelham and his tutor, Captain Bruyers.3 They returned to Rome to witness the visit of the Emperor Joseph II and his brother Peter Leopold, Grand Duke of Tuscany (15-30 March 1769); the former travelled as Count Falkenstein, and went informally (being 'quite proud of his humility', as Anne Pitt remarked). Lord Algernon sat to Batoni that year (Alnwick; Clark/Bowron 333) and his portrait with Dutens, attributed to Maron, is at Syon House. They left Rome in time to see the Ascension festivities at Venice, where they arrived on 3 May 1769.4 They stayed some time in Milan and 'several months' in Turin, where Lord Algernon hunted with the King and Dutens renewed old friendships. By October 1769 they were in Vienna for the celebrations of the marriage of the Dauphin (later Louis XVI) to Marie Antoinette; they left on 7 March 1771 and were in England in July.5 Lord Algernon was in Lausanne in the summer of 1773 and, according to George Grenville, he was in Constantinople in 1774, trying 'the sea voyage as his last stage'.6 In November 1776 Father Thorpe said Batoni had finished a second whole-length portrait of him (untraced).7  Lord Algernon returned to Italy with his wife in 1782. They passed through Geneva in July 1782,8 and were in Florence in the autumn,9 again with Dutens.10 By 2 December they were in Rome,11 where later that month John Ramsay noticed Lord Algernon playing back-gammon.12 A daughter was born in January 1783, and they were announced as leaving Rome on 5 April, intending to return straight home,13 although John Ramsay saw them there on 8 April.12 In July Lord Algernon and 'his most amiable lady' were in Florence with Mann, for whom they were to take volumes of engravings back to England for Horace Walpole.14
He was with Richard Talbot in Padua1 and Rome, where they were both described as Cattolici living near the Strada Felice.2


Charles Burney met Perkins in Florence in September 1770 and noted that he had resided in Bologna and Florence 'a considerable time in this city and in Bologna'; he had the remarkable faculty of imitating on the violoncello, 'the violin, flute, french-horn, trumpet, hautbois and bassoon' (Burney, Tour, 261).
Perrault was in Turin at the same time as John Bligh and Walter Chetwynd in November 1739,1 and he visited Florence the following summer.2
Charles Perrott was in Padua on 7 October 1704.1 In November 1706 he died in Venice 'following a very violent feavor & was buried next day in a small Island'.2 He was probably related to the James Perrott in Padua in 1701, and they may have been the two Perrotts whom the Duke of Shrewsbury met in Rome in March 1705.3

A young gentleman of fortune in Oxfordshire', Perry was apparently in Rome in May 1736 when Lady Walpole gave him a letter of introduction to Lord Essex in Turin.1 In July he enrolled at the Academy in Turin for three months.2 While in Rome 'in the 21st year of his age' Perry sat for his portrait, whole-length before the Colosseum (attributed to Antonio David; Christie's, 22 Apr. 1983).  He returned to Italy in 1753 when Horace Mann noticed him in Florence in June: 'Good natured fat Mr Perry ... says he is diminished six inches since he left England, whither he is to return in a few weeks'.3 He had already acquired a number of works of art in Rome that year, including twenty-three modern marble busts (some of which remain at Penshurst).4




Lord Perth came to Italy with the Pretender's court in 1717. He had been 'sometime' in Rome, where he had enjoyed frequent audiences with the Pope, when he was summoned in March 1718 to Urbino by the Pretender.1 With the Earl of Mar and John Stewart of Invernytie, he was briefly interned in Milan in February and March 1719,2 see John, 6th Earl of Mar; by April he had set out for Spain.3
Pery was in Naples in December 1778 when Henry Tresham wrote to him concerning his purchase of a statue of Leda, and in February 1779 William Hamilton wrote to him in Rome saying how pleased he was to have been of service in Naples.2 In Rome Pery was admitted to the Arcadian Society.3  Among Pery's surviving papers are his account of a journey in Italy in 1777-8 (which also contains his copy of 'Notes taken at Rome by Sr William Hamilton K.B. in company with the Abbé Winckelman [or] Mr Byres' [presumably in April/May 1768]), together with a separate description of a journey from Turin to Genoa, a volume of 'Remarques' on various European countries written in Rome in 1778, and some notes on 'L'Italie in general'.1
Impetuous, muddle-headed and given to self-advertisement, Lord Peterborough's quixotic character was redeemed by considerable personal charm. Pope, Locke and Swift were among his friends. He was many times in Italy, but accounts of his travels are incomplete; it is evident at least that his earlier visits involved much diplomatic activity, directed towards strengthening the position of Savoy and that his last visits involved much raffish incident.1  In 1705-6, approaching the age of fifty, he was a prominent, if infuriating, commander with the allied forces in Spain. Twice during these campaigns he sailed to Italy. On 10 September he left Spain for Genoa; in Turin he then tried to arrange with the Duke of Savoy a combined attack on the French fleet at Toulon, and it was said that his business at Genoa was 'to procure a good Sume of Money then to Return therwith to Spain', or that he 'came away [from Spain] disgusted because the Earle of Galway hath the Superiour Comand'.2 He was back in Barcelona on 27 December. On 13 March 1707 he again sailed to Genoa, in a small naval squadron commanded by his second son Henry Mordaunt, but finding the Duke of Savoy forewarned of his unofficial status, his visit was curtailed. He wrote from Turin on 21 April to the Portuguese ambassador and was in Leghorn that same month.3 He arrived back in England on 20 August 1707. In February 1711 Peterborough went to Vienna as ambassador extraordinary to reconcile the Emperor with the Duke of Savoy.4 But the Emperor died on 17 April and Peterborough went on to Turin, where he had arrived by 29 April,5 to propose that the Duke of Savoy (whom he knew well) should take the throne of Spain. He was in Genoa with the Duke of Argyll (who had succeeded to the allied command in Spain) on 5 May, in Venice on the 8th and again in Genoa on the 14th.6 On his return to Vienna he was censured for his independent diplomacy and recalled home; he landed near Yarmouth on 23 June.  He was quickly sent off again on a nominally diplomatic errand, as ambassador extraordinary to the Diet about to assemble at Frankfurt for the election of the new Emperor. He was accredited on 11 August 1711 and arrived in Frankfurt late in September.7 By 26 November he had left Milan, reportedly returning to Frankurt,8 and British diplomats were to be kept busy tracking his progress in Italy. He was 'still' in Venice on 15 January 1712, and on 27 February was 'indisposed' and unable to proceed to Turin as he had been asked,9 but he had left by 4 March for Milan and Turin.10 On 26 March he was in Genoa, where he received instructions to meet the Electoral Prince of Saxony in Italy and invite him to England (instructions subsequently cancelled on 3 October).11 In mid-April he was back in Venice,12 where he appears to have spent much of his time, though little is known of his activity. Cunningham said he had seen him 'frequently ... lay out a great deal of money, but could not get him in with the virtuosi here, who had not put him to so much charges as the others that haunted his house'.13 Peterborough's letters (SP 92/29) show he was in Venice on 18 May, in Milan on 7 June and 30 August, in Lucca on 17 September and in Turin from 27 September to 11 November. He was back in London on 4 January 1713. In November 1713 he was appointed ambassador extraordinary to the Duke of Savoy who was about to be crowned at Palermo King Victor Amadeus II of Sicily.14 This was a mission of compliment and his responsibilities were closely defined to avoid further mischief; his retinue included Colonel Duhamel (aide-de-camp), Colonel Theophilus Oglethorpe and George Berkeley (chaplain). They arrived in Genoa on 28 January 1714 and Peterborough attended the coronation in Palermo in mid-February and stayed on in March; with Duhamel he then arrived in Naples on 23 April 1714.15 Five days later he had left Naples for Rome and Florence, where he arrived on 9 May, intending to go straight on to Bologna.16 But early in June he sailed from Leghorn to Genoa where he passed some ten days before going to Turin. Peterborough had all the while continued to correspond with the secretary of state at Turin.5 Early in July he was in Modena,17 from the 14th in Parma,18 and on the 27th he was in Venice. It was said he had meanwhile been appointed governor of Minorca in March, but on 27 July he was recalled to London.19 The death of Queen Anne on 1 August 1714, and the advent of the Hanoverian George I then ended Peterborough's diplomatic forays. He returned to Italy incognito early in 1715, probably for reasons of health. He arrived in Venice on 15 January and left on 11 March, his continuing correspondence with Turin showing he had arrived via Turin and had been in Bologna on 19 January; he intended to be back in England by 5 April.20  He was again in Venice in 1716. On 14 August Cunningham reported that Peterborough had been staying incognito with 'The Catina Bolognese' who, unwilling to go with him to Germany had run away, but he had found her in Verona: 'now', said Cunningham, 'all is made up, and she is not to goe wt him by reason of her big belly'.21 On 21 August Lord Harrold wrote from Venice that Peterborough 'who has been here sometime is now just gone for Hannover'.22 He was back in Venice by 1 January 1717, when Cunningham reported that he had 'sent to England some time ago for his plate, wch is arrived, the fashion of it so well liked, yt tis thought it will never goe out of Venice'.23 He was still in Venice on 29 January,24 but by 2 April was in Rome.25 'Here is Lord Peterborough', wrote Kent on the 3rd, '& his seraglio but they say he's no vertuoso'.26 At Easter 'Milord Peterburch' and 'Madama Cata Ului' were listed as living by the Strada della Croce in Rome.27 By the end of the month Peterborough 'and his family' had left for 'ye faire of Reggio', travelling via Florence.28 In May he was warned from London to keep away from all Imperial lands in Italy following criticisms he was alleged to have made of the Emperor.29 At the end of June it was reported Peterborough had recently met the attainted Duke of Ormonde in France.30  In September 1717 Peterborough became the subject of a major diplomatic incident. He was arrested in Bologna on 10 September under (the false) accusation of plotting against the life of the Pretender. He had been released by 22 October, but was still detained on parole on 26 November.31 During his confinement his house was said to be 'a kind of Seraglio he kept severall Ittallian Ladys in it'.32 Peterborough's statements made clear that he was in Italy and Bologna, 'where he has been many times', for private reasons 'regarding his engagement to Signora Catina'; he had letters of credit for 300 doubloons at Reggio and Venice; he cited the marchese Rangone of Modena as his friend, and explained he was intending to return to Paris, where he had left his grandchildren; he would go via Reggio, where he was to meet his friend the Abbé Gazzola, and Venice.33 He and his retinue were released and by mid-December Peterborough was back in Venice thinking of staying for the Carnival, but on 31 December he was said to be leaving for England 'on Saturday next'.34  On 24 February 1719 Cunningham again had cause for complaint about Peterborough: 'last year', he reported, 'having carryed wt him from hence another mans wife a Companion to Catina, ye man has been wt me and is impatient to have his wife come back'.35 On 15 December 1719 it was said that Peterborough had spent sometime at Genoa and was expected 'every day' in Venice.36 On 27 July 1720 he was again at Genoa.37  In the course of his travels in Italy, despite Kent's allegations that he was 'no vertuoso', Peterborough is said to have commissioned a number of paintings from dal Sole and he may have been the 'Admiral Peliemburgh' who sailed in to Genoa before 1703 and ordered his bust from Domenico Parodi, whom he vainly tried to take back to England.38
On 13 March 1721 Rawlinson recorded 'Mr Peters a Student in Physick of the College of Christ Church in Oxford came [to Rome] post from Naples', and ten days later he noted his departure for Florence.1 In July 1725 Peters was elected a Radcliffe travelling fellow (see John Monro), and in January 1728 Stosch reported that a travelling English doctor called Peters had been robbed by his valet 'de toutes ses hardes, habits, et Bagage: a la reserve de ses tableaux'.2
In 1774 Lord Charlemont recalled that while he was in Rome (1748-9 and 1751-3) 'there arrived ... an elderly gentlewoman calling herself Mrs Peters, with a young person, supposed to be her daughter, and named Miss Eugenia Peters. The difference between the mother and the daughter was obvious and striking... the latter, though plain almost to ugliness, had apparently received the most careful education .. she sang well, was perfect mistress of her harpsichord, ... some of the unoccupied among us, of which number [Philip] Stanhope [in Rome 1750], in spite of his father's earnest and galant exhortations, was one, persuaded themselves that they were smitten by the accomplishments of the amiable Eugenia. The ladies, having spent some months in Rome, set out for England, where, as I have been informed, the younger was owned by Mr [Compton] Domville, a well known and wealthy gentleman of Ireland, for his natural daughter'.1  An English lady, 'Maria Peteis', conceivably the mother, passed through Capua on 8 May 1752.2
Peters was sent to Italy by the Dublin Society on an allowance of thirty pounds a year, paid to him twice yearly by Lord Newtown-Butler. On his arrival in Rome, Peters wrote on 6 May 1762, 'I am but a week in Rome though I left Dublin last August, having been two months a sea between that place and Cadiz beating about in the midst of the equinoctial storms on board a little one-masted Dutch dogger; and was afterwards obliged to remain three months at Gibraltar before I had the opportunity of a man-of-war for Leghorn, but I hope now for some improving studies in this much-talked-of City of Rome'.1 In Rome he studied at the Accademia del Nudo and at Batoni's private academy. Of the first he wrote: 'At the Pope's Academy, where I attend, the human figure is every day in the week, holidays excepted, free for any person to draw after without any expense - in the summer at half an hour after five in the morning and in winter after nightfall - two hours each time; near which are many large galleries erected for pictures and statues, where people may at any time study, but it has this disadvantage, that the pictures are not allowed to be taken down nor scaffolds to be made; the light, however is very good and as well contrived as possible for the benefit of study...'.2 In another letter he mentioned Batoni's academy: 'I am under the direction of Pompeo Battoni, from whom I shall hope to get some furtherance in drawing; but I shall look after the Old Masters for those things that require most study'.2 Peters left Rome in about April 1763 for Florence, having been recommended to study in Tuscany and Lombardy. He was pleased to get away from 'those dissensions which, I am sorry to observe, seem more universally to prevail among the artists of our country than with those of any others. Our students in Rome are initiated into that manner of life which they afterwards lead in London, the ill effects of which we have often lamented together'.2 In Florence he stayed at the Hotel Carraio, known as Vannini's English house on the Piazza Soderini.3 On 25 September 1763 he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno.4 James Martin recorded on 22 November 1764 going with Peters to the church of S.Maria del Carmine, to look at Masaccio's frescoes in the Brancacci Chapel. Martin also noted seeing a portrait by Peters of a Mr Mitchell 'in Vandyke dress' as well as a copy of Titian's Venus.5 It is said that Peters was referred to as the 'English Titian' because of his series of portraits of reclining ladies, inspired by the Venus d'Urbino.6 On his second visit to Italy Peters was in Florence on 5 November 1771, when he gave the Duke of Gloucester a tour of the Pitti Palace. The next day they visited the Uffizi and the pietre dure workshop of Cosimo Series. The following day Peters accompanied the Duke to the Baptistery, the Duomo, the studio of Francis Harwood and later to visit Lord Cowper.7 By 1 March 1772 Peters was in Venice.8 John Skippe's notebook on painting techniques, dated Venice, 30 June 1772, mentions a portrait by Peters of the British resident, Sir James Wright with his family (untraced), which Peters considered the best picture he had painted at that time. The notebook also includes a description of the way Peters set out his palette and remarks on the pictures he copied (which included a Venus by Titian belonging to Wright).9 On 8 January 1773, still in Venice, Peters was staying at the Casa di Maria Udligher, S.Maria Nova, and his date of departure was given as 6 March 1773.10 By this time he appears to have been to Parma; Christie's sold in London (5 Feb. 1773) the collection of a Nobleman from the Court of Parma, consigned under the direction of Mr Peters. It may have been during this period in Parma that Peters made the copy of Correggio's Madonna of St Jerome (Parish Church of Saffron Walden, Essex). He was back in Florence in August and September 1774, copying at the Uffizi.11 By 21 December he had visited Perugia, where he carried out the commission for the 1st Baron Clive to copy Barocci's Madonna della Scudella, for which he was paid 100 guineas.12 By January 1775 he was again in Rome, where he wrote to George Romney recommending accommodation in Bologna, Venice (Mr Edward's), and Parma (the Gambara or Pavone inns); he himself intended to stay in Parma that April.13 His portrait of Edward Wortley Montagu in oriental dress (exh. RA 1776; priv. coll.) suggests he was in Venice later in 1775.

An Irish Officer in the service of the King of Sardinia, he came to Civitavecchia in charge of two boats and visited the Pretender at Albani (SP 85/14, f.336; Walton, 22 May 1723).
Pettingal travelled with a Mr Hallet. They were seen in Florence late in 1783,1 and Mary Berry met them in Rome on 21 December2 (Pettingal was possibly 'il Cav. Piteghi' who arrived in Rome on 29 November3). Dr Parkinson called on them in Naples on 14 January, and dined with them in Rome on 21 April and Verona on 3 June 1784.4 They had arrived in Venice on 9 May 1784.5

There are several disjointed references to a Mr and Mrs Petty in Italy between 1778 and 1783, as listed above, which may refer to the same couple.  'Cavalieri Peti con moglie ed un Figlio' had arrived in Venice on 1 June 1778.1 At Rome 'the Pettys' were noticed by Mrs Frederick Hervey that November;2 a Mr Petty was noticed in July 1779;3 in January 1780 Mr and Mrs Petty were involved in a fracas with Thomas Jenkins in which Mrs Petty 'conducted herself worse than a fool',4 and on 23 November 1782 'Miledi Petty' left Rome.5 By September 1783 'Mrs Petty' had climbed Mount Etna.6


Peyton had arrived in Rome by 23 December 1724 with a Mr Gooday, doubtless his tutor, and they were still there on 6 January 1725.1 On 1 February they disembarked at Ostia (having apparently come from Naples) with Sir James Nasmyth and Samuel Rolle (who had certainly come from Naples) and together they went on foot to Rome to see the Feast of the Purification.2 'Tomaso Peton' and 'Giorgio Coden' were living in the Strada Paolina at Easter 1725.3 On 27 March Rawlinson accompanied them to Castel Sant' Angelo.1 On 21 April Stosch reported that Peyton and 'Goudy' had left Rome for Florence.4
Richard Phelps appears to have led a varied existence as Jacobite sympathiser, tutor, antiquarian, soldier and diplomat, the successive stages identifiable through his five visits to Italy which were spread over a period of eighteen years. The existence of a contemporary namesake (see below) leads to the slightest suspicion that two travellers were involved (though this is not suggested in the Wal. Corr.).  After receiving an Oxford degree he was first in Italy in 1745 'a man of no fortune and though on the foot of a gentleman travels with Mr [John] Bouverie and at his expense'.1 In March Horace Mann reported they had obtained passports from the Jacobite Lord Dunbar [John Murray] to go to Naples.2 On 5 May they left Rome with James Russel and James Dawkins, travelling via Ancona and Bologna to Venice. After Ascension, Dawkins stayed in Venice while the others went on to Florence in July.3 They were in Rome on 24 October when, with Joseph Leeson, they dined with John Clephane.4 By January 1746 Phelps was paying conspicuous attention to the Pretender with Rowland Holt and John Monro, while Bouverie was rather more discreet; Mann said that Phelps was 'a fellow at Oxford and flaming. He has nothing to lose'.5 At Easter 1746 'Sig. Cavalier Felts Inge' was staying in the Strada Croce in Rome.6 In February 1748 Russel sent Phelps in London some drawings of classical sculpture.7  Phelps was again in Rome, this time with Lord Charlemont, by March 1751; he was doubtless the 'Feb' / 'Felp' sharing rooms with a Mr Cook in the Palazzo Mignanelli at Easter 1751 and 1752.8 James Russel noticed him in Rome in November 1751.9 He appears prominently in The Parody of the School of Athens (NGI) painted by Reynolds that year,10 and for his managerial role in a musical and masquerading society in Rome, see Charlemont.  By 20 September 1752 Phelps was at Badminton, tutor to the young Henry Somerset, later 5th Duke of Beaufort (b. October 1744).11 By December 1755 he told Lord Charlemont that he was yearning to make 'a small excursion abroad in order to reassume the Toga Virilis, which a long attendance upon a Lad from seven to eleven ... has absolutely worn off my back'; he also sent his sincere respects to his namesake, if he was in Dublin.12 He duly returned to Italy in 1756, accompanying Fulke Greville who was with his wife and infant daughter Frances. In October they were in Florence, admiring the voice of 'the great Mingotti' at the opera, and in November they reached Rome. Phelps was on the look out for sculpture for Badminton and Worcester Lodge, and he twice wrote to the Duke of Beaufort (who, however, died before receiving these letters), once with drawings by 'a man whom I employ in copying Antiquities' of pieces from the Capitol and Medici Gallery which might appropriately be copied; Phelps also recommended alabaster vases from Tuscany.13 In December the Grevilles had gone on to Naples, while Phelps stayed in Rome writing philosophically to Norborne Berkeley (Beaufort's brother-in-law): 'A Man that banishes himself from his country sees with a more unprejudiced Eye what passes in it ... I present myself here upon my own footing' cultivating the best company so that 'I shall be able to do more justice to any young Nobleman I may hereafter travel with'.14 On Christmas Day 1756 Phelps was hosting a party in Rome, singing, said Robert Adam, 'like an angel'.15  He left Rome at the end of January 1757 for Calabria and Naples where Sir James Gray was particularly kind to him. He saw Herculaneum and told Berkeley of some Greek books just uncovered, one of which was a tract against music.16 On 27 February he was about to embark for Sicily accompanied by the young architect Robert Mylne and Matthew Nulty.17 They stayed until June, and Phelps's letters emphasise the seriousness of his expedition and describe his hopes to publish the antiquities he saw.18 In July Mann met him in Florence 'in a great hurry for England',19 describing him as 'having travelled often in Italy as a companion or governor, [and] I believe is in orders'.20 There was no mention of the alarms Phelps had caused Mann in 1745-6 and Phelps later remembered receiving many favours when he had lived in Mann's residence.21 He was back in England by August.20  On 16 December 1758 Robert Mylne recorded Phelps returning to Rome with Edward Dering.22 In January 1759 Mylne and Phelps went to Tuscany for two weeks, meeting Robert Surtees in Florence and Nathaniel Dance and Delane in Leghorn.23 Phelps then spent the summer in Siena,24 and Mylne was expecting him back in Rome late in September.25 In 1762 Phelps became secretary to George Pitt, the British envoy at Turin (who arrived in Turin on 6 March 1762). He was now styled Major Phelps and from Turin on 10 March he explained to Mann (not altogether convincingly on the surviving evidence) that he had seen military service since last they met, 'tho' I now brandish the pen instead of the sword'.26 In the course of his duties he discussed Cardinal York with the Duke of York and military affairs with the Duke of Savoy,27 while assuring Norborne Berkeley he would look after his nephew Lord Berkeley when he arrived in Turin.28 Phelps left Turin in 1763 when he was posted to the embassy in Madrid.


Philips was tutor to Bielby Thompson on his grand tour, and two of his letters addressed to Mrs Thompson (dated Padua, 4 June, and Lucca, 13 October 1706),1 provide some detail. They spent ten days at Venice where they saw the entry of the French Ambassador and the Ascension festivities. From Padua2 they went to Lucca where Philips wrote that 'the great Pleasure of this Countrey consists in seeing and hearing'; they had spent three weeks 'very agreably, by reason of ye Operas that were then at a Countrey seat of ye Grand Duke's'; he proposed that 'in three weeks we shall goe from hence to Leghorne and after a short stay there of two or three Days, continue our journey directly to Rome'. He particularly stressed how 'ye Bravery of ye English Nation is the common subjects of Conversation every where abroad'.
Ambrose Phillipps travelled extensively in France and Italy studying architecture.1 A book of his careful drawings (RIBA) includes many Roman monuments, and the amphitheatres of Verona and Pola. His observations on Roman architecture were received by Joseph Spence and Lord Middlesex. Spence saw him in Venice, probably in November 1731.2 He was in Padua in December 17313 and 'monsu filipps eretico' was staying near the Piazza di Spagna in Rome at Easter 1732.4 His pastel portrait attributed to Rosalba Carriera remains at Garendon Park.
This unhappy traveller went abroad for his health. By the time he reached Rome Sir Erasmus had already been to Naples, Baiae and Aix, but 'all to no purpose'. Having once loved a lady who then married another 'he dragg'd about a miserable life of Pain and Anguish for some time, which at last settled in a Constant pain in his breast ... ever since, tho' tis some years ago'.1 Lady Pomfret saw him in Florence in 1740,2 and he was staying in Rome that year.3 He was in Bologna in May 1741,4 and came under Horace Mann's observation in Florence in June, looking ill, 'with some pain in his back; he will have no advice till he grows worse and then will call Cocchi'. He recovered but remained aloof, having only Martin, a painter (presumably Charles Martin), as his companion; by September Mann said he was 'extreme lean' and 'goes nowhere'.5 Philipps left Florence in September for Turin.6


His itinerary is given in an anon. travel diary in the Townley MSS; he was with John Bohun and Sir John Blois in Venice.
A Jacobite, Philips acted as governor to the 3rd Duke of Beaufort on his grand tour in 1726-7. He was warmly recommended to the Duke by the Pretender who considered that Philips's 'greater experience of the world may enable him to moderate sometimes in you a zeal which cannot be too much commended, but which it may be sometimes more advisable to conceal'.1 In Rome in the Vatican, where the party were inspecting the Raphael tapestries, he said (hardly surprisingly, given his antagonist's Hanoverian role), he would break Stosch's head but for the place they were in.2 With the Duke he received a miniature of the Princess Clementina by Wolfgang.3 In 1727 he was described as dealing very badly with the Duke's finances and being so 'fier et imperieux & aussi gâté dans ses Principes' that the Duke 'ne savoit comment se debarasser'.4 He borrowed money from the Duke to build up his private collection of works of art, a circumstance which had dire consequences, for subsequently in London Philips was accused of selling a number of the Duke's Italian purchases at Cock's in 1728 (24-25 Jan.).5 Patrick Cockburn told the Duke that some pictures bore Philips's seal and he (Philips) was 'a gentleman of Honour'.6



Pickersgill appears to have lived for sometime in Geneva and Turin. Seven letters addressed to his sister from Turin, two dated 1761 and one 1768,1 describe a Carnival season, the opera, and a pleasant, uneventful existence; one (undated, but probably later than 1761) reveals that his father is paying for his grand tour. It is here assumed that Joshua was the Pickersgill met by James Martin in Florence and Siena late in 1763, and by John Morgan in Venice in July 1764.2




Mr Pierrepont Nobile Inglese' was in Venice with 'Ed. Dillon' in May 1795,1 and they spent three days in Verona in November before leaving for Germany.2




Pigott had travelled in Germany before visiting Voltaire at Ferney in 1763. He passed through Geneva in July 1764 en route for Venice and Constantinople.1 He was in Venice by 27 July2 and in August was hoping to go to Constantinople with Olivier Hope. In 1765 Pigott, with a parcel from Constantinople, proposed going to Florence.3 He was possibly the 'Sig. Cav. Piccod' who arrived in Florence from England on 21 March 17674 and the Piggott in Florence in December 1767,5 whom Lucas Pepys described as having 'been so long in Italy'.6









Described as 'a very little woman married to a great big man', Mr and Mrs Pinkard kept little company and 'no one knew what to make of them'. Mr Pinkard appeared insolvent, though he had 'a fine calash, and keeps his own horses'.1 'Monsu Pincard Milordo Inglese - 28/ Madama moglie' were staying in the Palazzo Zuccari in 1794 and 1795.2 They were presumably the Mr and Mrs 'Pincard' who left Venice on 5 May 1795.3
Pinnock set out from England in March 1791 with his wife and three daughters, Mary (b. 1774), Elizabeth (b. 1776), and Lucretia (b. 1779). Their itinerary is given in his journal.1 They spent much time in Pisa but, becoming 'sickly', they moved to Florence in July 1792. In August Pinnock left his wife and daughters to return to England on business, passing through Venice on 5 September,2 but he rejoined his family in Rome in January 1793. In February they moved to Naples; they rented the 'Grand Summer Floor' of nineteen apartments in the Crocelli and Pinnock took up bathing during the summer. Sarah Bentham, who met them in November, said the Pinnocks were in Naples for the education of their daughters.3 The only works of art they appear to have bought were some prints by Georg Hackert. They left Naples on 29 December with a new puppy 'of the King of Naples's breed', and arrived in Rome a few days later, staying at Zacharia's in the Via Conditta. Mrs Bentham met them again in Rome in January.4 They left Rome on 25 April 1794 and travelled north through Bologna, Padua, Venice and Verona; they were presumably the 'Mr Pinoche con Figlie' / 'Pinoch con sua moglie e tre figlie' listed in Venice on 13 May and 1 July 17945 - though their journal states they had arrived back in England on 10 July.

Mrs Piozzi went to Italy with a profound sense of relief. Her morose first husband, a wealthy brewer, had died suddenly in 1781 leaving her with five daughters, and the increasingly infirm Dr Samuel Johnson had then become an adoring but irksome presence. Defying convention, she had married Gabriel Piozzi, her daughters' music master, an Italian Catholic from the Veneto; they were the same age and it was a marriage founded on real affection. Within three months they set out to tour the Continent and particularly Italy. Piozzi took a portable harpsichord which fitted beneath a carriage seat and Mrs Piozzi prepared to write copiously of their travels.1  She was resolved to like her husband's country and they first spent six carefree months in Milan, which Piozzi considered his home. They took spacious rooms in the Casa Fidele and soon attracted homage from minor Italian writers and church dignitaries. Mrs Piozzi had an inordinate love of praise: 'the Women kiss me, & the Men write Verses about me', she told her daughter Hester (25 Feb. 1785). Mutual affection and frequent journeying prevented serious discomforts, but Mrs Piozzi had some difficulties with her Protestantism and over the choice of a cicisbeo (finally selecting an eighty-year-old priest), and there were to be occasions when social etiquette (as maintained, for example, by the aged Horace Mann in Florence) prevented Piozzi himself being invited to gatherings of the nobility. In December 1784 they learned of Dr Johnson's death and soon Mrs Piozzi began to compile her Anecdotes of the late Samuel Johnson (published in London in March 1786).  In April 1785 they went to Venice, sailing down the Brenta from Padua accompanied by music from Piozzi's little piano. Mrs Piozzi was entranced by Venice, the people, the architecture and the pictures which 'are all known in England I believe, but nothing can give one a just Idea of them except the Sight' (22 Apr. 1785). On 21 May they left for Florence, on their way visiting Bologna, where Mrs Piozzi was greatly taken by the paintings of the Carracci and Guercino. They spent three months in Florence, meeting a number of English people, of whom the Greatheeds, William Parsons and Robert Merry became close companions. Italian writers were constant guests and all collaborated on the production of The Florence Miscellany (published by November 1785), a collection of poems in English and Italian, written, as Mrs Piozzi explained in the preface, 'to divert ourselves, and to say kind things of each other'. She appears not to have recognised the radical undertones of the contents. Greatheed, Parsons and Merry were young men of liberal views, who sympathised with those nationalist and liberal-minded Italian poets whose academy, the Accademia della Crusca, had been repressed in 1783 by the Grand Duke (who then founded and took control of a new Accademia Fiorentina). Towards the end of their stay in Florence Mrs Piozzi was stricken with fever which hastened their departure on 12 September. But they then met swarms of gnats in Lucca and moved on to Pisa and then Leghorn, where the Johnson Anecdotes were completed. They took a villa near Pisa, at the Bagni di Pisa under the Apennines, before Piozzi too fell ill, a circumstance which led to their departure for Rome on 17 October. Rome she found somewhat disappointing. The mixture of squalor and splendour disturbed her; it was like Rembrandt's pictures, 'composed of the strongest lights and darkest shadows possible' (4 Nov. 1785). She could not understand how the Palaces should have entrances serving as Necessary Houses, or how the rich could allow their servants to hire out their coaches, 'dress other Men's Dinners, & hang wet Rags out of Windows which if you look into, will exhibit scenes of enormous Wealth & Imperial Luxury'.2 After a month they moved on to Naples where they were greeted with a thunderstorm and an angry Vesuvius, but they were soon enjoying English company - the Duke of Cumberland's party, the Greatheeds, George Coxe, the Robert Tighes and Jervises. 'At Naples', Mrs Piozzi reflected, 'the people seem all merry and fat, dirty rude, and savage like their Prince; who rides, & rows, and catches Fish and sells it, and eats Macaroni with his Fingers' (Thraliana, 2:654-5). They returned to Rome at the end of Carnival week, in February 1786, and stayed for seven weeks. Mrs Piozzi returned to her 'old Employment of seeing Palaces & Churches; examining Statues, Pictures &c.' 'I passed two mornings in looking at the pictures of Sasso Ferrato and Andrea Mantegna, Names which I used to know only in Books: the Works of Guido Reni ... give one the real, & true, & unaffected Delight which that Art can afford', she told her daughter Hester (4 Mar. 1786). She sat for her portrait to an unidentified artist (NPG), 'as a Red-haired old Hag in a white Bedgown' (27 Sep.1786) and bought a 'Canaletti' of the Piazza S.Marco.  On 19 April they left for Venice. Their coach broke down at Spoleto in the Apennines, but they were rescued by two English travellers, Leonard Chappelow and Charles Shard, with whom they progressed slowly to Bologna. There Mrs Piozzi made the detour to Cento to see Guercino's birthplace, before proceding to Padua where they again met the Greatheeds. She bought more pictures in Venice, including a sketch by Guido Reni for his celebrated Aurora and works by Salviati, Domenichino, Amigoni and 'Bassano'. On 12 June, as the heat grew oppressive, they left for Milan, passing through Padua, Mantua and Verona, which she came to regard as the epitome of all she liked best in Italy. On 21 June they returned to Milan after an absence of fourteen months. They passed some time at Varese and then stayed with Count Borromeo at his palace on Isola Bella in Lake Maggiore. On 22 September the Piozzis finally left Milan to return to England through Germany. At the close of her Italian travels Mrs Piozzi reflected that 'The Works of Man may be great & lovely: Apollo de Belvedere however, or Venus de Medici soon fade from one's Remembrance, & leave the Cascade of Terni, and Gloom of Pozzuoli indelibly impressed' (Thraliana, 2:639). Although she found Italy 'a Sink of Sin; and whoever lives long in it, must be a little tainted' (ibid., 640), yet she expected to regret it '& particularly Venice & Milan - for all the Pleasures of which two Places I can think of nothing in London that is to make me amends: excepting a Muffin in the Morning, & Mrs Siddons at Night' (ibid., 673). Meanwhile her 'little Talents' had been respected 'much beyond their Deserts: my Conduct extolled far above its Merit, & my Conversation sought from the mere Prevalence of true Admiration and Esteem' (ibid., 676). In 1789 Mrs Piozzi published her Observations and Reflections Made in the Course of a Journey through France, Italy, and Germany (a German translation appeared in 1790).

When Anne Pitt was about to set out for Pisa in February 1774, Horace Walpole told Horace Mann that she was 'Lord Chatham's sister as well as his very image'.1 She was not in good health and, finding that the baths at Pisa did not agree with her, she came in April 1774 to Florence where Mann, charmed by her 'lively and entertaining' conversation, gave her an apartment in his own residence.2 He observed that she was 'weak and emaciated', 'her vivacity often [exhausting] her strength' and late in May she set out to try the waters at Abano near Padua.3 Anne Pitt was in Italy at the same time as Mrs Penelope Pitt (who was also elderly and unwell) and it is at times difficult to establish which is which, but the 'Madama Pitt' in Venice on 24 June 1774 was probably Anne,4 and she was certainly in Naples in October.5 On 20 May 1775 Mann reported she was about to return to the baths at Abano, having recently come back to Florence from Rome, where she had been 'more active in running after curiosities than any of the young men,'6 and where she presumably had been the 'Madama Pit' staying 'Seguita la Selciata di S. Sebastianello' in the parish of S.Lorenzo in Lucina at Easter 1775.7 In September 1775 she was in Geneva about to go to Nancy.8 By November she had returned to Rome holding conversazioni 'for ye English every Monday'.9  In April 1776 she had just returned to Florence, having been in Lorraine (she had frequently stayed in France in the past)10 and driven from the baths at Pisa 'by the riot and noise of building the scaffolds for their ridiculous battle of the bridge after Easter'.11 In December 1776 she was again in Rome,12 and she visited Naples early in 1777, returning to Rome in April.13 She was then still not well, according to Thomas Pelham who saw her in Rome in April and July. In December Mann said she was 'still at Rome', her compassion for a sick French servant preventing her from going to Naples that winter.14 She was in Florence by April 1778, 'in better health than for some years past',15 and on 16 May she stood proxy for the Grand Duchess at the baptism of Lord Cowper's second son.16 She left on 28 May for Bologna 'hoping to be able to proceed to England in the course of the summer, but [she] dreads the fatigue'.17 She was back in England by September, but shortly afterwards her nervous temperament gave way and she was confined until her death in 1781.18
Elizabeth Pitt had travelled in France throughout 1752 to effect a break with Lord Talbot with whom she had been living in England.1 Augustus Hervey met her at Lisbon in 1753 and thought her 'clever, but mad', with 'the face of an angel and the heart of all the furies'.2 She may have returned to England in August 1753,3 but she was in Florence the following year, becoming a Catholic on 8 March 1754.4 Horace Walpole had warned Horace Mann that she was qualified 'to go any Italian length of passion'5 and Mann found her behaviour 'a continual series of extravagancies from the first day'.6 She pursued an Italian young enough to be her son and one William Preston, a Leghorn merchant, with whom she left Florence in August 1755.7

George Pitt toured Italy as a young man with Edward Holdsworth as his tutor. They arrived in Turin towards the end of June 1740 and after a few days proceeded to Milan, where they remained until 19 September. They spent October in Florence (where Pitt rather fell for Lady Charlotte Fermor, Lord Pomfret's daughter)1 and early in November visited Pisa, Leghorn and Siena with Nathaniel Castleton and Samuel Dashwood. Castleton went on with Pitt and Holdsworth to Rome later that month. In Rome they stayed in the Piazza di Spagna, next door but one to Joseph Spence.2 They returned to Florence in March 1741 and later that month were back in Rome, where they stayed some time. In May they visited Albano and Frascati with the Abbé Grant, Lord and Lady Pomfret and Lord Lincoln, and they were still there in September.3  Pitt had apparently visited Venice earlier that year, his portrait having been drawn by Rosalba Carriera by April 1741, as recorded by James Russel, who went on to praise him: '[he] does not squander away his time and money as too many of our wild young sparks do, in drinking, gaming, &c. but studies very much, and diverts himself with music and drawing; in which last he has made such proficiency that were he in our Academy, I should soon grow jealous of him'.4 Pitt, a handsome man, was also admired by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.5 He was presumably the 'Monsu Pit' listed as living at Rome in the Salciata via di S.Sebastiano at Easter 1741 and 1742.6  Both Horace Walpole and the Rev. Russel said Pitt was going to visit Italy with his wife in 1749,7 but nothing more is heard of such a visit.  In 1761 George Pitt was appointed British envoy at Turin and he resided there between 6 March 1762 and 28 April 1764.8 He was to have gone with his wife, but he went with his mistress 'Amarante'.9 Two years later Louis Dutens said Pitt was returning to England to get a separation from his wife, who had refused to come to to Italy unless he broke off his liaison.10 In April 1764 George Hobart wrote that Pitt 'is coming home from Turin, they say mad', and Walpole then described him as 'brutal and half mad'.11 He may also have been the George Pitt in Florence in 1771 with Salter, 'an English Parson ... a sensible worthy man' and 'Chauford' [James Crauford?];12 in Venice, alone, on 3 November 1771,13 and in Capua with Salter on 23 December.14 In 1772 he was seen in Rome by Patrick Home who confided in his notebook: 'a sensible worthy man ... Mr Geo Pitt. Handsome Figure - Good natured - much addicted to low women'.15  For his wife's separate visits, see Penelope Pitt.
Mr and Mrs Pitt with their daughter Marcia (later Mrs George Cholmondeley) were in Rome in February 1778 (giving a ball which Mrs Frederick Hervey was to attend)1 and in July.2 Batoni painted their daughter the same year (Clark/Bowron 409). John Pitt arrived in Naples on 24 February 1778.3
Mrs Penelope Pitt was, according to Horace Walpole, 'one of the most glorious beauties you ever saw',1 but her marriage was not a happy one, George Pitt heaping on her 'every possible cruelty and outrage'.2 She spent several years in Italy on her own from 1772, when already her sight and hearing were fading,2 although in 1773 'the elegancy of her figure struck everybody'.3  She was in Italy at the same time as Anne Pitt (who was also elderly and unwell) and it is at times difficult to establish which is which, but Penelope was certainly in Turin and Milan (where Philip Francis mentioned 'Mrs Pitt a lady of a certain age [who] travels in Company - with a Mr Mathews') and in Florence in mid-November 1772, about to leave for Rome and Naples.4 In Rome Cardinal de Bernis was disappointed to find she was not Anne Pitt.5 She had arrived in Naples by 20 December (and was probably the 'Madama Pitt' with a Mr Sandys in Capua on 4 December),6 but she had returned to Florence in January 1773.3 By 17 April she was again in Rome.7 She may have been in Venice in June 1774,8 and she was in Florence in September 1775, 'so deaf that her society is become very troublesome'.9 She returned to England, to leave in 1786 for France where she bought a house near Lyons, spending the winters in Nice. In the spring of 1791 she was with her daughter, Mrs Beckford, who died in Florence. Penelope Pitt was in Lucca in September 179410 and died in Milan on 1 January 1795.11
In 1760 Thomas Pitt had travelled in Spain and Portugal with Lord Strathmore. He arrived in Florence from Leghorn on 25 April 1761,1 and set out for Venice the next day to see the Ascension festivities; by 20 June he was at Parma where Lord Strathmore (whose health had not allowed him to stay in Spain) rejoined him.2 In August, when he was at the baths of S.Casciano near Pisa with his uncle Sir Richard Lyttelton, Pitt received news of his father's death in England, which made him shorten his travels.3 He attended, briefly, the University in Florence4 and he probably appears in a caricature group (Exeter AG) and a drawing by Patch.5 He arrived in Rome with Sir Richard at the beginning of October for a stay of about three weeks, at the end of which he spent a few days in Naples with Strathmore.6 In Rome he had been introduced by James Russel to George Dance, from whom he commissioned a drawing of the Colonna gallery, and in Naples he met James Adam.7 On 1 November he began his homeward journey from Naples,8 via Rome and Florence, to reach England at the end of December.  Ill health was to drive Pitt back to Italy with increasing frequency. In 1778, 'a weakness [having] fallen on his knees and made him a cripple', he set out for Italy 'like Aeneas, with his Creusa, her father of 87, and two sucking babes' - his father-in-law Pinckney Wilkinson (aged eighty-five) and his two children Anne (1772-1864) and Thomas (1775-1804).9 In May 1778 they arrived in Venice,10 and by December had reached Rome. 'Mr Pitt, Lord Chatham's nephew, is lately come here', wrote Mrs Frederick Hervey on 8 December: 'he is so like him that I had like to have cried the first day I saw him' [Chatham had died on 11 May].11 He encountered John Soane, whom he had met in London and of whom he was to be an important patron. Soane was later to acknowledge Pitt's 'classical taste and profound architectual knowledge'.12 From Rome he travelled to Naples where he was again ill; he was still confined in June and could not leave until the end of August.13 In September he was staying at the baths of Pisa.14 Pitt was to remark in 1780 how much England's reputation had changed since his last tour in 1760-2, 'then so flourishing, now so fallen'.15  As Lord Camelford he returned with his wife and daughter in 1787-8. They were in Rome in December and saw much of Elizabeth, Lady Hervey, her sister-in-law Lady Erne, and Thomas Jenkins.16 Angelica Kauffman asked him to try to persuade the Treasury to abolish the heavy import duties on their works; he consented to do so, though his representations met with no success (see also Prince Augustus).17 Lord Grey de Wilton met them in Bologna in mid-May 1788,18 and they arrived in Venice on 27 May.19 On 13 September Lord Camelford was writing from Lausanne. In October 1789 Father Thorpe wrote that Camelford had engaged apartments in Rome but would not come after all.20  The Camelfords were in Rome again in 1791-2, when they met the Rev. Edward Taylor and his family. Herbert Taylor remembered Lady Camelford as 'a kind, good-hearted lady', while 'nothing could exceed [her husband's] kindness of disposition and manner'.21 Anne (now 'a beautiful daughter who studies Italian'22) kept a diary [Pitt (Anne) jnl.MSS] which frequently refers to her father's poor health, and describes their visits to galleries, studios and monuments, and their friendship with Lord and Lady Malden and Lord and Lady Clifford. Their contacts with artists were particularly close. They visited the studios of Durno and Fagan (11 Nov.), Canova (17 Nov.), Jacob More (19 Nov., 10 Dec.) and Guy Head (10 Dec.). They entertained Skirving (7 Dec.), Head and Flaxman (who made a sketch of 'some alterations he proposed making in Papa's fountain'), Hewetson (12 Dec.) and Grignion, Deare, Durno and Fagan (18 Dec.). On Christmas Day and on 24 January 'several artists dined with us'. Hewetson bought them antiques (20 Dec.), and Flaxman accompanied Anne to see museums (27 Jan.). She found the Palazzo Doria was so cold they could not stay (30 Nov.); the Raphael Stanze were wonderful, but pleasure was 'mixed with regret at the dreadful state they are in' (13 Dec.); the Pope was having many statues restored in the Capitol (19 Jan. 1792), and in the Palazzo Boccapaduli she noticed copies of the Poussin Sacraments recently bought by the Duke of Rutland (16 Jan.). Her father bought two little studies by Gaspard Dughet (19 Nov.), and four Claudes from Gavin Hamilton on 7 January; he sat to Guy Head on 9 March 1792, while in January 1792 Anne gave seven sittings to Vigée Lebrun who painted her as Hebe.23 They returned to England in June (and Anne was married in July). Lord Camelford, in poor health, immediately returned to Italy with his wife. He was in Florence in December intending to go to Rome, but he died on 19 January 1793 in Florence (or Pisa).24 'His death grieves us all', wrote Mrs Flaxman, 'he was the Artists' Friend'.25

Thomas Pitt travelled with William and Richard Assheton, with whom his name frequently occurs in the Berry and Parkinson journals. When the three were staying in the Strada della Vita in Rome in 1784 Pitt's age was given as 26.1 He sat to Angelica Kauffman in Rome in December 1783. He was possibly the Pitt presented at Court in Turin on 3 February 1785 (he had previously been introduced on 26 October 1783).2
Mr Plaistow was introduced by a letter from the Duke of St Albans to George Pitt, the British envoy at Turin as 'of an ancient family in Buckinghamshire', while his wife was 'of the Chabot family who are Marquis de St Maurice, and one of the best houses in Savoy'. Pitt passed on the reference to Horace Mann in Florence, adding that people had doubts about them. Richard Phelps then told Mann that Plaistow was suspected of being an adventurer (SP 105/314, ff.102, 139, 135, 168; G. Pitt, 27 Mar., 21 Apr. 1762, and Phelps, 21 Apr., 19 May).
Playfair went to Italy with his wife when he was already established as an architect. In October 1791 Tresham introduced them to Canova in Rome1 and they were dining with the Flaxmans in December 1791 and January 1792. The Playfairs left Rome for Naples on 11 March 1792 and returned on 2 April; on the 15th they 'set off'.2 Flaxman had asked Sir William Hamilton to show Playfair his vases in Naples,3 and told his parents that Playfair 'an eminent architect ... has promised me at his return which will be in 3 or 4 months he will serve my father in his business if it is in his power'.4 One of the drawings he made for Thomas Blayney Balfour for Townley Hall, co. Louth (NLI), is dated Rome April 13 1792, and a design for a Casino (RIBA) is dated Rome, 24 April 1793, the only evidence of a later visit.
Captain Pleydell' was travelling with the Duke of Gloucester, but he was in Venice in May 1775 before the Duke arrived,1 and was probably still there in September when Lord Balgonie was staying with 'milord Plegol' [Pleydell] and 'milord Satter' [Rev.  Salter?].2

Plimmer was described as 'Painter & Sculptor' when he arrived in Rome in 1755, but it was as a landscape painter that he practised for five years in Italy.1 He studied under Richard Wilson and later told Henry Hoare 'I have endeavoured to imitate Claude and Nature with as much care as I possibly could ever since Mr Wilson left Rome'.2 He was in Naples in 1757,3 and he thanked Hoare for his advice to take classical views about Naples,2 but from 1758 (when his age was given as 33) to 1760 he was living in Rome in a house in the upper part of the Corso with Thomas Jenkins.4  In June 1758 Jonathan Skelton alleged that Jenkins, Plimmer, Robert Crone and Richard Wilson 'were like one Person' and that, after Wilson's departure, Crone and Plimmer were responsible for having him branded a Jacobite.5 In June 1759 Jenkins described Plimmer as 'without comparison the best Landskip painter we have at this time in Italy and is allowed as such by all the Dilletanti here'.6 There are drawings by Plimmer of views in and about Rome from 1756 (BM and two albums: coll. Brinsley Ford, and Christie's, 8 Jul. 1986). He had copied a Claude for Hoare by June 1759,2 and by July 1760 he had painted views of Rome and Naples for Lord Grey (later 5th Earl of Stamford) and Mr Southwell (see Southwell 1759-60).7 He was also working on two historical scenes commissioned by James Grant of Castle Grant, Dido fleeing Aeneas (or Dido and Aeneas in the Storm) and a Landing of Aeneas in Africa.8 A classical landscape by him dated 1758 belongs to Brinsley Ford. On 15 September 1760 Plimmer exported 'quattro Quadri moderni, tre di figure, ed. un che rappresenta un Paese'.9 Plimmer also told Grant he had bought a St Catherine and a Magdalen by Guercino,7 but within four months, on 19 November 1760, Jenkins was telling Grant of Plimmer's death.10 In March 1761 amongst 200 pictures exported from Rome by Jenkins were 'parte dipinti dal defunto Monsu Plimmer pittore Inglese'.11 Grant's histories were completed by Crone and were 'near finished' in February 1764.12

In 1769 Plowden had charge of John Biddulph at the English College in Rome.1 In October 1779 Plowden was in Milan with Maxwell, and in October 1780 he was 'supposed to be with Mr Middleton' [i.e. William Constable-Maxwell who assumed the name of Middleton, who had previously been expected in Rome with Sir Alexander Strachan in February 1780 (2 Feb. 1780)]. The two had last been seen 'at Milan about ten days ago' (21 Oct. 1780*). In February 1781 Thorpe said that Plowden and Middleton had lately been in Naples, and were expected 'in Rome before the end of the Carnival, & after Easter in England' (14 Feb.*); they were in Rome in March 1781 (3 Mar.*). On 25 March Middleton and Plowden were in Venice.2  In 1788 Thorpe sent from Rome, through 'my friend Mr Ch. Plowden', a picture to Lord Arundell (16 Jul. 1788).
Plowden visited the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome on 2 February and 13 August 1702,1 while he was a student in Rome between 1701 and 1704. In the course of his career as a Jesuit priest he was in Florence in 1705 and at the English College in Rome in 1706 and from 1728 to 1734, from 1731 as Rector (Holt).

A Jacobite and an unscrupulous merchant, Plowman lived 'high and splendidly' in Leghorn with Sir Alexander Rigby and William Shephard.1 In 1702 he was imprisoned and heavily fined by the Grand Duke of Tuscany, apparently for trading in goods stolen from French vessels; his prizes were (at least in part) taken by Captain John Brome of the Philip and Mary, Plowman's ship. A diplomatic incident arose after his case was mispresented in London. The Queen demanded 50,000 crowns from the Grand Duke 'for the damages suffered by William Plowman' and the British Factory at Leghorn was told to prepare to withdraw. But this move was deeply resented by the merchants who issued an Apology to the Queen [n.d., but probably May 1704] insisting that the incident had arisen through deceit and libellous reports, that the Grand Duke was innocent, and that the Factory was too well established to be withdrawn for such specious reasons. In presenting the apology in London, Edward Gould called Plowman a bigamist and a Roman Catholic, the author of Calumniano and False Book. Plowman's business later collapsed, allegedly because of scheming by Italian merchants. In 1706 he opposed the appointment of an Anglican minister in Leghorn.2


Mr Plummer was in Rome in November 1714.1 A letter from Walter Plummer at Rome, dated 26 January 1715, concerns Rizzi, a former English consul.2 He was probably the 'Mr Plummer' who had arrived in Naples by 5 March 1715, having travelled from Rome with Pattee Byng and others.3



After studying at the RA schools Plura left for Italy in 1777, Giuseppe Baretti writing letters of introduction for him to acquaintances in Milan and Venice in May.1 On 11 September 1778 Plura left Rome with Thomas Jones for Naples and they spent several weeks together, before Plura returned to Rome on 10 November with John Henderson.2 In September 1779 his name appeared on a list of artists in Rome, 'Plura, Strada Croce/Sculptor'.3 Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) visited him in Rome on 24 September 1779 when he was working on a marble bust of John Hippisley.4 At Easter 1780 'Guise Blura Sculte Ingle.' was living 'seguita Strada della Croce verso Piazza di Spagna' with an English painter 'Giovanni Grangia' [John Grainger?].5 In September 1780 Plura was copying in the Uffizi,6 and 'Gioseppe Pluva' was twice in Venice in 1781, on 11 February and 16 May. He was back in England in 1782.7 In 1786 he exhibited a bust of the Abbé Grant at the RA.
Lord Plymouth, succinctly described by Patrick Home as 'A fine Fat round English Lord. Loves Eat', made a brief tour of Italy in 1772, immediately after his succession as 5th Earl, with his governor Dillon, 'a Swiss - Well bred' (again according to Home).1 He was in Florence in January and February, 'the most sweet tempered fat body I ever knew', said Horace Mann; 'his indolence already makes him prefer a bed and an elbow chair to all other amusements'.2 In Rome he sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 348; priv. coll.), the portrait being seen in Batoni's studio on 30 April,1 and Zoffany in Florence included him in his Tribuna (Windsor). Plymouth was seen in Naples in the summer and again in Florence by 13 June.3 He arrived in Venice with 'Giuseppe Dilon' on 16 September,4 and was back in London to take his seat in the Lords by February 1773.5  He returned to Italy in 1791 with his wife, Sarah, and two children, Lord Windsor (1789- 1833, later 6th Earl) and Lady Maria (1790- 1855, later Ms. of Downshire), and they appear to have stayed for five years, principally in Rome and Naples. Lord Plymouth was not in good health. They arrived in Rome in November 1791,6 and were in Naples by February 1792 when Lady Plymouth was one of the English ladies with whom Prince Augustus was consorting (the others being Lady Malmesbury and Mrs Heneage Legge).7 In January 1793 Lady Palmerston described Lady Plymouth as 'good humoured, unaffected and pleasant',8 the more remarkable as her husband's health and sight were both declining. She gave a ball at Naples on 9 March 1793,9 and on 16 April she received a slim volume, Figure Originale, from Carlo Labruzzi (coll.Brinsley Ford). According to Lady Webster (who was a close friend), Lord Berwick had become very attached to Lady Plymouth by May 1793, but early in 1794 he was treating her with disrespect.10 In January 1794 in the course of a smallpox epidemic in Naples, 'to which 7,000 infants have fallen victims', one of Plymouths' infant boys died.11 Lady Plymouth was back in Rome by March 1794, when Angelica Kauffman painted the two children.12 On 6 July 1794 it was reported from Rome that though Lady Plymouth had lost a son, she was in a fair way of replacing him soon; her husband however, was 'in a very bad way, for he is very near blind, and his legs are so swelled that it is thought he is going into a dropsy'.13  Lady Plymouth held a ball for Prince Augustus in Rome in February 1795, at which the assembly (and in particular Robert Fagan) did not measure up to Lady Knight's proper expectations.14 During the summer they were at Bologna where, Lady Knight recorded,  Lady Plymouth next attracted marked attention from William Pitt Amherst; 'Mr Amherst does all the leading honours to the lady, but I hear, fears his honoured uncle [whose title he would inherit] should know it'.15 They were again in Rome in August 1795 with Colonel Dillon, Amherst and the Prince as the 'only English society'.16 By December they but had moved to Naples, where it was reported that Lord Plymouth was 'almost blind, and but small hopes are entertained of his eye-sight being restored; the conjugal attachment and attention of his amiable Lady, is the subject of general conversation'.17 Then Lady Berwick in February 1796 described how Amherst 'was still at Anchor at Plymouth' and, she continued, 'if Ld P's eyes begin to open perhaps he may be surprised to see her Ladyship's shape so enlarged'.18 Shortly afterwards the Plymouths returned to England, passing through Padua on 30 March en route for Venice.19 Their second daughter was christened in London in September 1797. Lord Plymouth died on 12 June 1799, and Lady Plymouth married Amherst on 24 July 1800.
Pocock first visited Italy when he put into Leghorn as Captain of the Aldborough in 1739.1  Having just retired from the Navy, in 1766 he brought his dying wife to Naples, where they arrived on about 26 December.2 The following September they left by sea for Leghorn, William Hamilton doubting whether Lady Pocock would last the journey;3 she died on 24 September.

On one of the many sea voyages Pocock made from his native Bristol, he was at Leghorn aboard the Betsey from 7 June to 17 July 1770 (D. Cordingly, Pocock [1986], 30-1).

Richard Pococke became well known as a relentless traveller, and particularly for his expeditions to the Middle East and his explorations of the Alps. He came first to Italy for a six-month tour in December 1733, accompanied by his younger cousin Jeremiah Milles (the future antiquary),1 and he described this journey in a series of letters to his mother (Pococke letters MSS). Three letters from Milles to his uncle, the Bishop of Waterford, (Milles letters MSS; from Bologna, 24 May; Modena, 26 May, and Venice 10 Jun. 1734) furnish further details of their itinerary. Pococke's letters particularly stressed the social standing of the British travellers he encountered, but he found space to describe an apothecary's shop in Florence where he bought 'some Essences & lip salves of Jessamine'. In Rome, where he found 'forty English' he visited the English Coffee House 'for an hour after 'tis dark, where most of our nation meet' (4 Feb. 1734). He described the Roman Carnival (1 Apr.), and was then very moved by the Good Friday offices at the Vatican ('how strange so ever it seems on first hearing of it'); he bought a summer suit of silk ('in this country any one is almost pointed at that wears cloth in summer'), and met the antiquary Martin Folkes with his family and the painter [James?] Wills (11 May 1734). On their return north, he described the Ascension festivities at Venice, 'a very dear place', where he stayed at 'Kennets a very good English publick house' (13 Jun. 1734), and dined with the British resident Burges, 'a most facetious merry old Gentleman' (23 Jun. 1734). They left Venice in a Bucello 'a large covered boat with a handsom room in it' for Fusina, thence to Vicenza. Pococke's last Italian letter was from Turin on 26 June,2 and they were at Dover on 11 July. On his second tour he left Dover on 23 May 1736 and, having spent time in Germany and Eastern Europe, he had arrived in Venice, from Trieste, by 21 August 1737 (the last letter from Italy in the Pococke letters MSS). He twice mentioned his friendship in Italy with a Mr Wood, probably Robert Wood, the archaeologist, who was in Padua by the summer of 1738. On 6 September he sailed from Leghorn for the East, telling his mother that 'in two days [I] shall be in the Turkish habit, a turban and all'.3 By September he was in Alexandria and he went on to visit Cairo and Jerusalem during a tour lasting over three years.  Returning from his great expedition he landed at Messina in November 1740. In Naples, where he twice ascended Vesuvius, he lodged with George Stuart and George Belsches at the Three Kings hotel. On 13 January Pococke left for Rome, where he again encountered Stuart and Belsches on 8 and 19 February. By June Pococke was in Chamonix, where his curiosity (and subsequent publications) largely initiated the vogue for Alpine travel.  Pococke assembled an outstanding collection of Greek and Roman coins which was sold after his death in 1766 (Langford's, 27-8 May).

In 1798 Mariana Starke recommended 'Mr Polhill, a skilful Surgeon, who had lately had the care of our naval hospital at Leghorn' and was then residing in the Palazzo Bertoli in Leghorn.1 Two of his infants sons were buried in Leghorn 1786 and 1789, as later were Polhill and his wife.2


As Lord Leominster Thomas Fermor travelled to Italy with Martin Benson (later Bishop of Gloucester).1 They were in Rome by June 1718, and on 29 September Leominster was expected to stay there for a further month. Dr John Hay then described him as 'a truely virtuous, sensible, and worthy young Nobleman, of a close application to his improvement'.2 Leominster was buying paintings in June, and in November William Kent, who had completed for him a Hercules and his Mistress Eola, said he had agreed to sponsor a sculptor who was also to assist Kent.3 Leominster and Benson visited Padua twice in 1719: on 15 January 1719 with St George Ashe and the latter's tutor, George Berkeley,4 and on 27 March 1719 with Compton Domvile.5 Leominster was back at Easton Neston when he married in July 1720.  On his second visit to Italy, when he was Earl of Pomfret, he travelled with his wife and two evidently attractive daughters, Lady Sophia (1721-45, who m. 1744 the 2nd Earl Granville) and Lady Charlotte Fermor (1725-1813, who m. 1746 the Hon. William Finch), 'the cleverest girl in the world; speaks the purest Tuscan, like any Florentine'.6 After a year in France they arrived in Genoa on 12 June 1739 and sailed on to Leghorn, arriving by 1 July. The Countess, a somewhat humourless lady with pretensions to scholarship, kept a factual travel diary and maintained a regular correspondence with Lady Hertford.7 In Florence they stayed at the Palazzo Ridolfi ('a vast palace and a vast garden', now the Ginori-Venturi) where Horace Walpole and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu visited them. They received company every Friday and in the winter they had 'a select set and a sixpenny pharo table'. Some thirty years later the 9th Earl of Winchilsea (Lady Charlotte's son) was shown the house by the elderly G.B. Uguccioni, who had been one of Lady Sophia's keenest admirers: the winter and summer apartments where Lady Pomfret held conversations and balls twice a week, the 'Great Colossus' and the Grotto in the garden, and 'a little room fitted up with shells &c that is underground & which you go through the Cellars to get at'; two of the rooms had been reserved for Charlotte and Sophia, one where they 'used to be sometimes Six hours without intermission reading and writing', and the other where they kept 'Canary birds'.8 In December 1740 they witnessed the severe floods in Florence, and they were then joined by their son George, Lord Leominster, until 27 February; in October he was still in Turin.9  In Rome the antiquarian Mark Parker escorted Lady Pomfret. She climbed into the dome of St Peter's, comparing it to 'a burning brass cauldron'; she met the artist-dealer Richard Dalton, with whom she supervised Lady Hertford's commissions, but she was also said to have let some artists down, including Masucci.10 In May she visited the Pope's San Michele tapestry manufactory which she carefully described to Lady Hertford. She also found time to write a life of Van Dyck. They frequently saw the Abbé Grant, Lord Lincoln (who appeared to be much attracted to Lady Sophia) and George Pitt (who was struck by Lady Charlotte). Lady Pomfret left Rome with regret, 'and a wish to return before I die'. They passed through Bologna on their way to Venice (where they met Rosalba Carriera), and two weeks later they set out on their homeward journey.  After their return to England the Pomfrets 'corresponded much with Italy': Lady Pomfret sent Uguccioni a silver standish and the marchese Niccolini, the Florentine man of letters, copies of the Institution of the Knights of the Bath and the Hangings of the House of Lords.11

According to Vertue, Pond made 'a tour of Italy 2 years', returning to England in 1727.1 He was in Rome with George Knapton in the spring of 1725, engaged in exporting plaster casts from the antique.2 On 1 March 1727 Stosch reported that after spending 'quelques années' in Rome he had left that morning with John Elwood 'pour s'en retourner en Angleterre en droiture'.3


Ponsonby was in Rome in December 17361 and had arrived in Venice from Florence in May 1737.2  In 1738 he accompanied Lord Sandwich, James Nelthorpe and John Mackye on their voyage to Constantinople (see John, 4th Earl of Sandwich). On their return they came to Florence from Leghorn (where they had performed their quarantine) on 19 October 1738.3 On 18 November, with Thomas Caracene, a Greek Doctor ('dragoman of the Kiaia lately strangled in the Ottoman army'), Ponsonby set out on his journey to England.4
William Ponsonby was in Turin in April and May 1764, when Edward Gibbon wrote of him: 'ce garcon a l'abord froid et les manieres enfantines mais lorsqu'on le connoit on le trouve d'une societè fort agreable'.1 By the end of May he had arrived in Genoa with an Irishman, Hamilton; on 11 July, with Captains Perry and Hatsel, he left Florence for Rome and Naples.2 Ponsonby had James Byres as his guide in Rome and was joined by William Guise and Gibbon; in October James Martin met him 'at Mr Guise's and Mr Gibbon's lodgings'.3 He was seen in Rome late in 1764,4 but Martin saw him in Venice on 12 January 1765 and in Vicenza and Verona in February. On 28 February Ponsonby 'set out [from Verona] to continue his journey towards England'.5

Edward Poore, who appears to have been a temperamental connoisseur and collector, spent many years in Italy, but evidence of his visits is far from complete. 'Mons. Poure' arrived in Venice on 2 July 17891 and attracted the derision of the dealer G.A. Armanni who found it 'strange that someone who loves the subtlety of the Greeks should have the patience to look at the stranezze of Tiepolo, the caricatures of Celesti and the schiribizzi of so many lesser painters'.2 He had already been in Rome to judge from a letter he wrote from Salisbury on 12 February 1790 concerning English artists he knew there; Fagan was copying Domenichino and Titian for him, he was contemplating a Bacchus feeding a Tiger from the antique in marble from Deare ('I have a strong fancy for a small bit of marble from his hand'), and he advised the melancholic Hugh Robinson on the colouring of a sketch of Cupid and Psyche; Pichler was repairing for him a chalcedony Faun's head which was to be left with Thomas Jenkins.3 In the same letter he said that he hoped to be at Rome before the Carnival of 1791.  He was in Turin in November 1791, when the British envoy John Trevor described how 'mon ami M. Poore' had bought a copy of Bodoni's edition of Horace.4 He is next recorded spending the winter of 1792-3 in Naples.5 He dined with Robert Parker in the Hermitage (near Naples) on 11 March 1793,6 and later that month he went on an excursion to Paestum with the Palmerstons, Mary Carter and Lady Webster, who found him 'very eccentric'.7 A year later in March 1794 Thomas Brand told Lord Ailesbury that he had met his friend Mr Poore at Salerno.8 In July he was in Mantua and Verona on his way to Trent9 and in August he was in Munich on his way home.10  Subsequent references to Poore's difficult nature occur in artists' letters from Rome; Deare has a quarrel with 'that dirty fellow Poore',11 and the death of Robinson was credited to 'different uneasinesses the first of which was that affair with Mr Poor which prayed on his mind';12 William Theed confirmed that Poore 'does not like to part with his money though in the end pays artists very liberally - he had some squabbles with painters in Rome'.13  Edward Poore died in Palazzolo on 17 August 1803 and there is a monument to him in the Protestant cemetery in Rome.14
Because of the merchant Pope's insolvency in June 1741, Horace Mann could get no tea; he called him 'a sad rogue [who] has cheated everybody'.1 Pope fled to Rome and was imprisoned there.2 It was possibly the same Pope in whose Leghorn warehouse Richard Rawlinson inspected his books in July 1722.3
On 18 May 1736 Edward Allen, the British consul at Naples, received a letter from the Duke of Newcastle in London 'by the Hands of my Friend and Relation Mr James Porten'.1 On 16 June 1747 Allen referred to the death of his brother James Porten, who owed him a great deal of money.2
Described as having been for 'some years before 1760' the British resident at Naples (DNB), Stanier Porten was mentioned at Messina in November 1750,1 and on 26 July 1757 he signed a memorial from British merchants in Naples addressed to Sir James Gray.2


Robert Porter was a merchant with whom Thomas Jones returned to Rome from Castel Gandolfo on 4 August 1777.1 He was provisioning the British fleet in 1794.2 There had been a firm of Becher, Porter & Smith in Civitavecchia in 1771 and in March 1779 Robert Porter was described as 'Negoziante Inglese, da' pochi Annia stabilitosi in [Civitavecchia]'.3
I set out merely with a view of Amusement & in the hope of passing agreeably the period between College & Matrimony', wrote Porter. He came to Italy having spent five years in Europe, and his notebooks (Porter MSS) suggest a cultured and indefatigable traveller. He took with him 'a wooden case which serv'd for a travelling library' and his learning is displayed in quotations from 28 classical authors. Siena was commended for the 'purity of its idiom, & likewise for its being free from gnats'. In Naples and Rome he was accompanied by a Captain Rowley, and James Clark and Colin Morison were his respective ciceroni. Porter reflected that £800 p.a. was enough 'for any young man upon his travels', the sum to include 'Pleasure, Amusement, Comfort & Instruction'. He thought a man might live abroad for £200 p.a., though 'to do this, he must not only be naturally an Oeconomist, but must likewise have had some experience of the Mode of Living upon the Continent'. He concluded that 'except Turkey, I have seen every thing that is worth Notice in Europe. I have not met with a single traveller, who has made the Tour so completely as myself'.

The 2nd Duke of Portland had been 'above a fortnight' in Venice on 1 December 1730.1 He was in Padua on 13 February 1731,2 whence he passed through Rome to arrive in Naples by the beginning of April.3 He intended to spend the whole summer of 1731 in Rome.4 In July 1732 he reached Toulouse on his return journey.5

George Potter was a witness at the wedding of William Chambers in Rome on 24 March 1753, and was said to have 'dyed about a year after the date of this Certificate'.1 He was probably the 'Potter' at Capua on 2 December 1752 with Nathaniel Webb, John Cholwell and others, going to or coming from Naples, and he was again in Capua with Lord Charlemont and Edward Murphy on 14 June 1753.2 A whimsical letter from Potter to Lord Charlemont, dated Rome, 2 March 1754, says he is 'now at Death's door'.3 He was probably the 'George' described by the Abbé Grant to Lord Charlemont (30 April 1754) as being beleaguered with debts and soon to leave Rome.3 Grant settled his debts and Potter returned to London with Lord Charlemont and Edward Murphy in January 1755, see James, 4th Viscount Charlemont. Robert Wood, writing to Charlemont on 17 January 1755, sent his 'compliments to Potter'.4 Pancrazi had dedicated a plate in his Antichita Siciliane (Naples 1751-2) to Giorgio Potter.
Potter was chargé d'affaires at Turin from February 1768 to March 1769 (when William Lynch arrived as British envoy).1 In March 1768 he confirmed to Horace Mann that he was deputising for George Pitt, the absent envoy, in Turin,2 and in September he met Charles Townley.3 He was possibly the Potter whom Lucas Pepys had encountered in Turin in October 1767: 'here above a month, he is enter'd at the Academy, wears a uniform and seems as if he were beginning again his education'.5 He may also have been the Potter who travelled from Turin to Genoa with the Marquess of Kildare and Lord Carlisle in March-April 1768.4
At the request of William Pitt's secretary, George Rose, he was given introductions in Italy to Horace Mann, John Strange, John Udny, Thomas Jenkins and Lord and Lady Cowper;1 he was also recommended to Cardinal de Bernis by Vergennes from Fontainebleau.2 Henry Quin noticed him in Rome sometime between December 1785 and April 1786.3
Potts arrived in Venice on 25 July 1772,1 and in August was seen there performing 'feats of horsemanship'.2

Mr Poulett' arrived in Florence on 13 July 1753 and stayed into August.1 By 10 November he was in Rome,2 and on 5 January 1754 he was passing through Capua on his way to Naples.3







A most amiable nobleman', Lord Powis was accompanied in Italy by William Patoun whose assured manner led to the pair being called 'Mr Powys and Lord Patoun'.1 By 21 October 1775 he was in Rome,2 where he followed a course of antiquities under James Byres. Robert Wharton attended this course and also shared a Papal audience with Powis3 (to whom the Pope gave presents for his mother).1 Powis and Patoun left Rome for Naples in December 1775,4 by which time Powis had apparently sat to Batoni. Nearly a year later, on 28 September 1776, Batoni was finishing 'a plain portrait of Lord Powis';5 it is dated 1777 (Powis Castle; Clark/Bowron 399).  Lord Powis was again in Rome in 1782.6



Poyntz was secretary to Sir William Lynch, the British envoy at Turin, from 1773, and chargé d'affaires from 1776 to 1779 (when Mountstuart arrived); he was planning to return to England in December 1779.1 Many of his offical letters are contained in the Genoa cons.corr. MSS. He died at Leghorn on 28 October 1789 and was buried in the Protestant cemetery.2


Pratt passed through Rome travelling with Leveson Vernon to Naples,1 where he met Charles Collyer, another Norfolk gentleman (and his future brother-in-law). They returned together to Rome and stayed until the end of March when John Soane saw them leave.2 By 20 April they were in Venice with a letter of introduction to the resident John Strange from Henry Bankes.3 On 22 April Pratt wrote from Venice to Soane at Genoa, mentioning Metcalfe, their mutual friend at Rome, and offering an introduction to a French Abbé at Tours.4 They met Soane again on the road to Mantua on 8 May. Both Pratt and Collyer commissioned work from Soane on their return.
In straitened circumstances following the death of her husband, Mrs Pratt first travelled on the Continent when she was already over fifty years old.1 In Rome she met the Duchess of Buckingham 'who immediately conceived a friendship for her'. They were in Venice in July 1731 en route for Paris and Spa. Burges reported that Mrs Pratt 'could not forbear calling the Pretender's wife Queen ... this gentlewoman came into Italy about twelve months ago with a maidservant only, & went into Her Grace's family sometime before they left Rome. She is the widow of Mr Pratt who was formerly Deputy-Paymaster-General, & failed in that employment'.2 In 1735 Mrs Pratt returned to Italy, accompanying the Duchess's son who died in Rome on 30 October, see Edmund, 2nd Duke of Buckingham.  She returned to Italy six years later. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu saw her in Turin late in September 1741 (the Duchess of Buckingham being daily expected),3 and Horace Mann received a 'Mrs Prat' with Hugh Bethel in October 1742.4 When the Duchess died in 1743 she left Mrs Pratt a considerable fortune.



Father Thorpe mentioned him being in Rome between December 1777 and July 1778.1 He sustained an accident returning from Castel Gandolfo with the Abbé Grant in July 1778 and Lord Pembroke met him in Rome in September 1779.2

William Hamilton had presented Preston as his chargé d'affaires at Naples by 4 June 1771, and he announced Preston's departure on 30 March 1773.1 When Lord Baltimore died in Naples (14 September 1771) Preston firmly handled a dispute with the British consul Isaac Jamineau over the administrative consequences.2 He was probably the Mr Preston visiting Pompeii in the Dowager Duchess of Beaufort's party early in 1773. On his return to England, he passed through Rome and Florence in April 1773 with Lord Findlater who described him as a 'worthy, sensible man';3 Lord Winchilsea said Preston and Findlater were returning together from Rome to England.4
Preston signed a merchants' memorial in Leghorn on 4 August 1755.1 In August he was said to have left his business at Leghorn to marry Elizabeth Pitt, but the marriage did not take place.2
Preston was staying with 'Orne'[?] near the Piazza di Spagna in Rome at Easter 17711 and he was listed in Siena on 8 May, having come from Rome with 'Horun'[?], Dickton and Henry Cotton.2
Charles Price made the grand tour between 1724 and 1730, when he returned to Jamaica (DNB). He may have been the 'Preis' who arrived in Rome with a Mr Nichols in March 1729 (SP 85/16, f.515).
He erected a booth for exhibiting feats of horsemanship in Naples in October 1782.1 At an unknown date, 'Pietro Price' with his wife and company, en route for Constantinople, obtained permission to demonstrate their riders in Rome.2
In October 1738 Robert Price set out from Geneva for Turin with William Windham and Benjamin Stillingfleet. In Rome, where they were listed at Easter 1739 staying at the Locanda of Marco Aurelio Celli,1 he took drawing lessons from Busiri, from whom he and Windham acquired a number of paintings. Price, an accomplished amateur artist, was urged to make engravings of his own Busiris, but appears not to have done so. They visited Naples and Venice before reaching Geneva in the spring of 1740; there they formed the 'Bloods' or 'The Common Room Set', a lively English group. Price left Geneva in October 1741, smuggling his Busiris home in a fiddle case.2



Uvedale Price' was in Padua on 16 September 1711,1 and was reported in Venice two days later: 'the eldest son of the Lord Baron Price is come to pass the winter here'.2
Price was in Genoa in April 1767 when he met his schoolfriends the 2nd Earl Fitzwilliam and Charles James Fox, see Fox. Together they went to Venice for Ascension before passing the summer in Florence, where Price was said to have studied Italian with Fox (DNB). In December Price and the 2nd Earl Fitzwilliam were staying at Hadfield's.1 In July 1768 they travelled with Fox to Turin,2 and the following month Fox and Price visited Voltaire at Ferney.3


Edmund Prideaux and his son Humphrey (1719-93), who had just come down from Cambridge, were in Florence in October 17391 and Padua in April 1740.2 Soon after their return to England in March 1742 they talked with Horace Walpole who was not impressed: 'I have been plagued all the morning with that oaf of unlicked antiquity, Prideaux, and his great boy'. The same letter revealed that they had talked with Stosch in Italy, presumably in Rome. In July 1742 Horace Mann was still forwarding letters from Mr Prideaux to Rome.3 An album of Italian views at Prideaux Place may be by Edmund, whose portrait by Rosalba Carriera remains there. Letters from Edmund while abroad to Martin Folkes were at Hillington Hall, Norfolk in 1878.4




Charles Proby, captain of the Terrible, put in at Leghorn in April 1746.1 In 1770 Commander Proby, his wife and son, arrived by sea at Leghorn, where they were entertained by Francis Jermy and the British consul, Sir John Dick; by 9 October they were in Florence and going on to Rome.2 In November 1781 'young Mr Proby, the Admiral's son', became the heir of his godfather Francis Jermy, 'whom he has never seen or heard of since he christened him'.3

According to a (lost) catalogue of pictures at Langley Park transcribed in 1840, before George Proctor acquired that house in 1742 he had lived in Venice, where he obtained two, or possibly four, Venetian views by Canaletto,1 and a group of gouaches by Marco Ricci (Christie's 26 Nov. 1974).

A protégé of the 4th Earl of Selkirk, he studied in Rome under Agostino Masucci, to whom he was introduced by John Aikman (Skinner, Scots in Italy, 29, and notes).

Dr Pugh was travelling with his wife and Mr and Mrs Wollaston. Mr Wollaston (a patient of Sir George Baker), was suffering from consumption, and Pugh tended him while abroad. They left England in July 1781 and spent some time in Switzerland before reaching Naples. Leaving Naples in April 1782 they went on to Rome and Pisa before sailing from Leghorn to Genoa and Nice. They spent a further year in the south of France before returning home.  On his return Pugh published in 1784 Observations on the climates of Naples, Rome, Nice, &c. In a letter to Sir George Baker, Bart. M.D. In which is inserted Some Advice to those who intend visiting these Places in Pursuit of Health. He advised patients to take an English physician abroad 'as the foreign physicians, but particularly those of Italy, are little competent to undertake the cure of those acute diseases, which so often arise in those warm climates. Their manner of treatment is totally different from the methods adopted in England. Bleeding, glysters, and bouillons, are their panaceas; not does it ever occur to them that nature may receive as it were new life by a timely and well applied method of practice' (44).

He was in Padua on 18 October 1704 with Henry Newport,1 and the Duke of Shrewsbury mentioned them at Rome in February 1705; Pulteney alone was at Venice in May, and at Augsburg in August.2
The difficult son of difficult parents, Lord Pulteney had been in Leipzig and Paris in 1748-9, before arriving in Italy in 1750. He was seen in Turin in June/July with his bear leader, a French Abbé.1 He was in Florence in August, when he was warned against using an antiquarian in Rome who was a Jacobite [possibly James Russel]; 'that's no reason at all', he replied, 'I have nothing to do with that, as I am of no party'.2 In Rome he stayed in the Palazzo Zuccari with his governor, listed as the 'Abbé Marchetti Francese Maggior Domo - 45'.3 He was seen in Rome in September 1750,4 and James Russel later remembered that Pulteney had given him encouragement when he was being persecuted as a suspected Jacobite.5 He had left Rome by Easter 1751 and was in Venice by July.6

Thomas Pye was a painter of modest ability, whose work in Italy was principally confined to making copies. He spent sixteen years based in Rome, living near the Piazza di Spagna in 1781, 1784 and 1785.1 In 1790, 1792 and 1793 he was listed as a history painter living at the Casa Rosa in the Strada Gregoriana (Rome Lists); from 1793-95 he was living in the Strada Felice and in 1797 near the Strada Paolina.2 Pye was noticed at Rome by Pacetti on 28 April 1782.3 On 26 September 1786 Jacob More told Lord Bristol that Pye had completed a 'Copey of Borgia' for him and in the following year More listed 'Mr Pys. Copy of Machiavel & Cesar Borgia' in a shipment for Lord Bristol.4 They were not, apparently well received, for on 16 December More told Lord Bristol that he had not considered Pye's copies 'in the ton of Titian's colouring and insisted on them being [retouched] which was agreed but afterwards he [Pye] refu'd to send on them to me to be examined and sent them off himself. I must make some apology for Mr Pye'.5 Undeterred, by 4 July 1787 Pye was about to leave for Parma to copy Correggio's Madonna with St Jerome for Lord Bristol.6 Pacetti mentioned him in Rome on 26 August and 30 September 1787.7 He was certainly in Parma on 28 October 1787 when James Irvine found him copying Correggio.8 Pye was in Rome in 1790, and in 1792 Robert Parker noted that he was 'an excellent copyist' (Rome List 1790). On the death of Jacob More in October 1793 Pye became, somewhat surprisingly, Lord Bristol's Rome agent,9 and in March 1794 Lord Bristol told Canova that Pye would pay him for any figures he was undertaking.10 In April 1794 Pye signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus from English artists in Rome (Rome List 1794).
Lord Quarendon was in Turin on 7 September 1701, when the Duke of Shrewsbury noticed him.1 On 4 November 1702 he left Genoa to travel overland to Leghorn2 and by 23 December he was in Rome. On 30 December he had a violent quarrel at Frascati (see Thomas, 6th Baron Howard of Effingham). He was living in Rome near the Strada Paolina in 1703 and 1704, when Garnel was named as his 'Maggior d'mo' and 'Anto Stevani' as his servant.3 In August 1703 he was ill and being subject to 'tentatives' from Catholic priests. Shrewsbury encouraged him 'in his good disposition' to resist them and continued to see him in Rome up to 13 February 1704. He was in Florence in April with Edward Wortley Montagu4 and they were together in Venice in May; by the 23rd they had left for Vienna.5
Quarendon's factual and mildly cynical travel journal (Quarendon jnl.MSS) provides little more than his itinerary. After spending several months in the Academy at Angers, he went on to Italy with Sir Roger Newdigate. They sailed from Marseilles to Genoa arriving in mid-September 1739. He continued by sea to Leghorn and stayed in Florence from 1 October1 to 14 December, displaying, according to Stosch, marked Jacobite sympathies.2 He passed through Siena (where he considered the Duomo as the 'noblest piece of Gothick performance now exstant') to Rome, where he was staying in the Strada Frattina at Easter 1740.3 Stosch reported that Quarendon and Lord Stafford were receiving 'extraordinary marks of distinction' at Rome, a circumstance he attributed to Lord Stafford's Jacobite governor (see William, 3rd Earl Stafford); they had consorted with the Young Pretender, John Murray and a 'Mr Fitzmorris' [Henry Fitzmaurice], before leaving for Naples by 28 February.4 While they were in Naples Stosch continued to report that they were courting the Pretender 'assiduously'.2  Both Stafford and Quarendon objected to these and other printed allegations of their Jacobitism, Quarendon complaining to the 'Imperial Minister in Rome' and Stafford approaching the 'Governour of Milan' and consul Edward Allen in Naples (who was convinced of his integrity).5 Quarendon left Naples after 6 May,5 and Rome on 11 May, travelling to Venice via Loreto and Bologna, where he was disappointed in Raphael's St Cecilia ('ye work is much cried up but is ye most Indifferent I have seen of this author'). He stayed in Venice nearly two weeks before going on to Padua, Vicenza and Turin, and he was in Paris by August. Having succeeded his father as 3rd Earl of Lichfield, he returned to Italy in 1760 and was in Turin in November.6 The following April he was in Milan, about to go on to Genoa; he complained that the Milanese never did anything but eat, play or sit and were quite 'void of ideas', but he briefly enjoyed the company of Lord Gormanston, John Needham and Edmond Rolfe.7
While the Duke of Queensberry was in Italy with his Scottish tutor, George Barclay (presumably the 'worthy old' Scot who was to attend Norborne Berkeley in Italy in 1736-8), he was much courted by the Jacobites, apparently without success. In November 1717 the Earl of Mar was trying to meet him in Padua;1 he had written a long letter to Queensberry from Venice on 7 November, urging the Jacobite cause on one whom he had known since childhood,2 but Barclay replied the next day from Padua explaining that Queensberry's 'age and want of experience make him ordinarily and wisely silent, but not without some resentment of what he and some of his friends have met with'.3 Queensberry (and Barclay) were at Padua on 2 December,4 and had arrived in Venice by 10 December.5 While he was there the libretto of Michel Angelo Gasparini's Arsace was dedicated to him.6 He left on 3 March to go to Rome via Loreto.7 On 1 April he was reported in Naples,8 but five days later he had met the Earl of Mar in Rome.9 On 27 May Alexander Cunningham said he was still in Rome, and was to have an audience with the Pope.10  In June one of Lord Linton's Italian servants 'barbarously killed' a Scottish servant of Queensberry's.11 The masters remained friendly, according to the Jacobite Francis Panton, who described the incident in a letter to the Earl of Mar: Panton thought Queensberry 'a fine gentleman' who probably had Jacobite sympathies.12 William Kent met Queensberry in Rome and said he drew 'very prettely', and by 16 August 1718 Kent had painted for him a Venus and Aeneas with life-sized figures.13 Queensberry was then still in Rome, but by the end of September he and Barclay were expected in Lyons.14 Meanwhile it was mistakenly announced that Queensberry was back in London on the 29 August.15
Quin, accompanied by a Mr Truell, set out on his travels in 1785 and returned in the autumn of 1786. He kept an entertaining diary (the first volume of which remains untraced) now in Trinity College, Dublin, (Quin jnl.MSS)1 which, apart from providing their Italian itinerary, comments freely on travellers and their ways. Thus at one of several receptions given by Cardinal de Bernis at Rome in January 1786, he observed that 'one of the old trouts' was 'an Irishwoman, Princess Giustiniani'; at another he remarked on the 'English as usual together in a clump'. The English connoisseur George Cumberland was 'a pleasant kind young Man only he tells too many Lies about Paris; perhaps he did not know I had been there'. Their tour of Italy lasted six months. They had spent a week in Turin at the 'Hotel de Bonne Femme' and another week in Milan where, on 31 October 1785, they met a Mr Bennet, an Englishman with his tutor, who helped them to purchase a 'voiture'. In Parma Quin met the Irish painter Solomon Williams, who sketched for him Correggio's Madonna of St Jerome. They spent two weeks in Venice and a week was sufficient for Florence; 'half the foreigners that come to Florence are English' Quin commented. Most of their time was spent in Rome, where both compiled lists of the British and Irish visitors; Truell mentioned seventy-four,2 while Quin, on 1 April 1786, recorded one hundred and thirty. 'The quantities of English I met last night at Cardinal Bernis's', he then explained, 'put me in the head of making out a list of such Names as I know & who have been here [in Rome] this Winter. I may have omitted several of them & there are many others whose names I do not yet know'. The Young Pretender, seen by Quin on 27 January, was not listed, nor were the artists Quin knew in Rome - H.D. Hamilton, Christopher Hewetson and Nathaniel Marchant (from whom Quin bought an intaglio).3 Quin was in Naples by 24 February and three days later paid a visit to Herculaneum, where he was critical of what he saw; 'I expected to see houses, Temples, streets etc just in the state they were left', but nothing was visible 'but the ancient Theatre'. Having passed three weeks in Naples they returned to Rome for Easter week, and then set out on their journey home. They sailed from Leghorn to Genoa, and were in Nice on 17 May.

Quin sat to Batoni in Rome in 1773 (Clark/Bowron 365; priv. coll.), and was received by the Dowager Duchess of Beaufort at Rome in May that year. On 11 May 1773 'Rictard Quin' and 'Mr Robrico' were at Capua, going to or coming from Naples, with passports issued at Venice.1 Quin was in Florence on 30 October, when he was presented by Horace Mann to the Grand Duke.2 Several old master paintings said to have been collected in Italy, were later seen in Adare Hall.3
Quinton was listed at Padua on 13 June 1707,1 and received his doctorate there on 1 March 1708.2
Mr Quirk' was in Rome on 26 August 1701 and 29 January 1702;1 'Querk' was about to leave for England on 2 September 1702.2
Lord Raby visited Italy twice while he was British ambassador in Berlin, though each visit appears to have been very brief. 'Raby the true not the counterfeit that is at Venice', was in Padua on 4 May, and 'Wentworth, Ld Raby alias' was there on 5 May 1705 with John Powell,1 probably the Captain John Powell from the ambassador's household in Berlin.2 The 'counterfeit' was presumably the Catholic impostor, see Wentworth. Lord Raby returned to Italy in the late summer/autumn of 1709, as he described in a letter to Lady Bathurst in January 1710. After attending the Kings of Prussia, Poland and Denmark and the Queen of Prussia at Berlin in the summer of 1709, he 'set out for Italy, and overran all that glorious agreable country in two months time. I was above six weeks in sick bed in Rome of a violent feaver I got by the excessive heats in travelling thither in the dog days,' but he succeeded in buying works of art for his new seat, Wentworth Castle, then being built. 'Though it cost me a great deal, yet it is a furniture for me and my posterity. I have about 30 pictures, most part originals by the best hands or the copies by good painters after the best pictures in Rome, and had I had time there I should have ruined myself with buying up such sort of curiosities'. He was back in Berlin by November 1709, when Williams & Smith in Venice were concerned with the dispatch of three cases of his pictures from Rome; their correspondence also reveals Raby had been in Naples, where he was unable to buy an (unnamed) picture. In 1710 Williams & Smith were getting for him a copy of Santo Bartoli's La Colonna di Augusto Traiano, and in June 1711 Raby (then in The Hague) received four views of Rome and some Roman imperial medals from Ficoroni (again through Williams & Smith).4  In July 1710 Raby told his kinsman Sir William Wentworth of Bretton, who was also in Italy in 1709, that he had 'great credit by my pictures and find I have not thrown my money away. These are all designed for Yorkshire, and I hope to have a better collection than Mr Watson [Thomas Watson, later Watson-Wentworth, of Wentworth Woodhouse]'.3 Other letters from him containing advice on Italian travel are quoted under William Wentworth of Bretton.  In August and September 1714 Lord Strafford (as Raby had become) was writing from The Hague (where he was then ambassador) to Christopher Crowe in Leghorn concerning his commissions for four statues by Soldani and some marble columns and pedestals. The statues, copies from the antique, were, it seems, subsequently executed by G.B. Foggini,5 and these commissions may well have been placed during his visit to Italy in 1709.


Like his older brother, the 3rd Earl of Derwentwater, who was attainted and executed in 1716, Charles Radclyffe was an ardent Jacobite, headstrong and extravagant. He had escaped to France after the 1715 rising and came to Italy soon after his marriage in Brussels in 1724 to the Countess of Newburgh, who had already two daughters by her first husband Thomas Clifford (1687-1719). Their first child was born in Paris in 1725, but their remaining issue, four girls and two boys, were all born in Italy: Charlotte (d. unm. 1800) in Turin 1726, the others in Rome between December 1727 and August 1732.1 Radclyffe and his Countess were in Turin in January 1727,2 and arrived in Rome in July.3 In October he was reported to have gone on a pilgrimage to Loreto.4 On 5 December 1727 Lady Newburgh gave birth to twins, Barbara (d. unm. 1769) and James Clement (d. 1788), the latter sponsored by the Pretender and the Princess Clementina. After Stosch left Rome in 1731 he alleged that 'la Conversation de My Lady Neuberg etoit devenu beaucoup plus brillante' and that the presence of her two older daughters, Anne (see Anne, Countess Mahony) and Frances Clifford (d. 1771), was attracting many English visitors to their house.5 But they would also have had to contend with Radclyffe, 'ye fiercest Jacobite alive', and 'ye Bully of the Party', according to Burges, the British resident; when he was drunk, which was not infrequently, he would publicly proclaim his disaffection.6 Stosch, who called him a furious and headlong enthusiast,7 recalled how in 1729 Radclyffe 'and his cabal of monks' had chased out of Rome one Denys Wright, a Hanoverian spy.8  In September 1732 it was reported that Radclyffe (de jure 5th Earl of Derwentwater) was going to Brussels to try to reverse the attainder on the title, 'ye wildest Project in nature'.6 Radclyffe had inherited his uncle William's house in Rome that year (see William Radclyffe); he was noticed in Rome in March 17339 and in February 1734 the assemblies at his house, which had frequently given rise to 'desordres parmi la jeunesse de Rome', were stopped by the Pope, and the young women (the Clifford girls?) temporarily placed in the Convent of S. Silvester.7 The family left Rome in June 1736,10 and were reported in Turin in July (with two daughters) returning to Paris.11  In April 1718 Cunningham had reported from Venice that a lady had arrived there from Genoa, giving out that 'she is Lady to ye late Ld Derwentwaters brother';12 she remains unidentified.
A shady character, Radclyffe lived many years in Rome following 'le métier d'usurier et de Brocanteur des bijoux d'Angleterre'.1 At Easter 1720 the 'Illmo Sigt. Gugliemo Radcliffe' was living with a John Briggs in the Strada Gregoriana,2 and in 1721 Radclyffe's house was described by Rawlinson as at the corner of the Piazza Novona, 'being a part of the Prince of Panfili's palace, very magnificent'.3 In July 1724 Stosch described how 'Ratclif', a Catholic who had been a merchant 'usurier' for some years, was arrested in Rome for ill-treating one Mrs Morison, formerly his servant and mistress; he wanted, understandably, to return to England.4 At the same time Rawlinson recorded that Radclyffe had been 'seized by two sbirns [sbirri] and carryed to the Monte Citono, and afterwards his house was given him for his prison'.5 Stosch said Radclyffe was on his deathbed in January 1730,6 but he recovered, eventually dying in Rome on 5 November 1732, leaving estate to the value of £50,000.7 He bequeathed his house and contents (which included a considerable collection of 'Radcliffe heirlooms', pictures, tapestries, armour, etc.) to his nephew Charles Radclyffe, to whom he had once paid an allowance.7

From 1726 Lord Radnor spent most of his life in Italy, living with a singer he had met in Naples. He is first recorded in Padua on 15 March 1726.1 Two weeks later he had passed through Rome on his way to Naples,2 but by mid-June he had come from Rome to Florence with William Wentworth, a nephew of the Earl of Strafford, and Miles Thornton.3 In July 1728 he was said to be in Paris,4 but in May the following year he was again in Rome,5 where he ['Lord R-'] lived in the Farnesina palace 'with his Psyche, who was lately a singer on the stage at Naples'.6 Stosch recorded him at Frascati in October.7  Lord Radnor is next mentioned in May 1731 passing through Leghorn,8 and he went on to Rome 'very discontented with the government of [that city], which seeks every sort of pretext to annoy English visitors who are not adherents of the Pretender's'.9 His 'singing girl' had been confined in a convent in Rome by order of the Vicar of Rome, but she was released by 12 June on condition, stipulated Cardinal Corsini, that she no longer lived in the Farnesina palace.10 They retreated to Venice, apparently with the intention of settling. The British resident Burges reported that Radnor had spent the greater part of the summer in the Venezia, having 'rambled a good deal ye two or three years past', but now had 'taken a very large House [in Venice] and furnish'd it most magnificently, for ye use of a family brought with him from Naples, and has maintain'd I believe these two years. He is lodged himself in another place'; though he talked of returning to England, 'he seems highly delighted with ye way he is in'.11 In July 1732 (when he had been abroad '4 or 5 years'), Radnor returned to England but, wrote Burges, 'it is thought, he means to come back again, because he has left a great part of his family behind him, & maintains 'em at great expence in his absence'.4 By July 1733 he was back in Venice but, said Burges, he seemed fonder of Florence 'than any other Town in Italy & sometimes talks of coming thither'.12 Martin Folkes met him in Venice that same July (and he noticed in Rosalba Carriera's studio a picture of Musick the model for which was 'a person now kept by an English Nobleman', probably Radnor).13 Radnor was again about to leave Venice for England in April 1734, 'not very much to the sorrow of his fair one' who, 'if it be true what every body says, does not care much what becomes of his person, 'if she but continues to touch his Pence''.14  In October 1735 Radnor came to Venice from Bologna,15 and he was last noticed in September 1737, when he had again left Venice to get money from England for his mistress.16
By the time he went to Italy, Raeburn already commanded a useful portrait practice in Edinburgh, while his marriage had assured him of a comfortable income. Urged on, it is said, by Joshua Reynolds, Raeburn and his wife went in 1785 to Rome, where James Byres proved a valuable adviser.1 Little is recorded of the two years Raeburn is said to have spent there. He painted Byres's assistant Patrick Moir, the portrait listed in Byres's house in Rome in 17902 (and Raeburn was later to paint Byres's portrait in Scotland). Two small studies, a David and Goliath and an Angel (priv. coll. 1961) are said to have been painted by Raeburn in Italy. In December 1786 Gavin Hamilton, another important Scottish friend in Rome, wrote that 'Young Raeburn' was shortly to leave Italy,3 and he returned to Edinburgh in 1787.
A merchant, whose name recurs in Neapolitan archives in June 1778, November 1787 (as an executor of George Tierney, with Charles Cutler) and May 1795 (ASN E 683, 684, 674).

An inscription on the wall of the Leghorn cemetery records that Ragueneau, with consul Burrington Goldsworthy, John Aikman and Francis Harriman, was 'deputed by the Nation to oversee the Work' [of establishing the Protestant cemetery in 1746]. He was doubtless the Ragueneau and the merchant firm of Ragueneau & Prescott, recorded in 1743 (see Prescott).
On 20 May 1757 Lord Holderness wrote letters introducing Raikes to Horace Mann in Florence and to Sir James Gray in Naples as 'a Gentleman of Fortune, who has been upon his travels some years in several parts of Europe', and was then about to leave Madrid for Italy (SP 105/311, f.31).
After accompanying the Duke of Gloucester in Italy as one of his equerries in 1771-2, General Rainsford returned to Italy in 1782 to consult Horace Mann in Florence over the military situation in Minorca. He arrived on 8 January but did not reach Minorca before its capture by the French. He returned to Florence on 20 April and departed for England later that month (Wal.Corr., 25:233, 271 and nn.).


Ramsay made four separate visits to Italy, spread over a period of nearly fifty years. He went first as a young painter, but on his last visit, when his eyesight was fading, his interests were those of an antiquarian. He was a man of 'a superior and disciplined mind' whose interests ranged widely. He first arrived in Italy at the age of twenty-three after completing his studies in London with the painter Hysing. He travelled with Alexander Cunyngham, whose journal provides a detailed record of their tour (see Alexander Cunyngham).1 In Florence Ramsay made drawings from statues in the Uffizi, and in Rome he experienced an initial disappointment with Raphael's Stanze (an experience later shared by Reynolds). Ramsay continued to draw classical sculpture and received more formal training under Francesco Imperiali and at the life class at the French Academy. He became acquainted with Batoni (then twenty-eight) and Camillo Paderni, another pupil of Imperiali (and later keeper of the museum at Portici). Cunyngham left Rome in March 1737, and the 'Monsu Ramse Scozzese Ateista' listed that Easter as living by the Piazza di Spagna ('seguita P. di Spagna verso Propaganda') may have been Ramsay.2  That summer Ramsay went with Samuel Torriano to Naples, to study with Solimena, then past eighty, to whom he had been recommended by Billy Bristow. He acquired 'great fame' he told Cunyngham, with his portrait drawings on blue paper, and Solimena himself sat to him. He was also composing poems and epigrams. James Clark, the Scottish antiquarian in Naples, later remembered Ramsay saying that he had seen Vesuvius erupt in 1737, 'a torrent of liquid fire covering the spot they were [then] passing'.3 On 1 October he returned to Rome with Torriano, whose portrait (dated Rome 1738) remains the only one securely associated with Ramsay's first Italian visit. Ramsay commissioned works from Paderni for the poet James Thomson and for George Turnbull's Treatise on Ancient Painting. In April 1738 he completed the purchase for Dr Richard Mead of a volume of drawings by Pietro Santo Bartoli and he intended to leave Rome in the middle of that month. Again he travelled with Torriano, to Venice (to see Veronese and Titian) and then to Modena, Parma, Milan, Turin and 'over the Alps as hard as we can drive'. Torriano left him at Marseilles, and Ramsay was back home in the early summer. On 10 June 1738 Dr Mead was still anxiously awaiting his Santo Bartoli drawings.4 On his second visit in 1754 Ramsay, now forty-one and an acknowledged master, was accompanied by his sister Catherine (d. 1798, unm.) and his second wife, Margaret Lindsay (with whom he had eloped in 1752).5 They spent two and a half years in Rome where they took rooms on the Viminale. There Ramsay was able to 'preserve the greatest part of [his] time for painting, drawing and reading', free from 'dinners, suppers and jaunts' among British travellers around the Piazza di Spagna. They nevertheless held weekly conversazioni for the English, 'and as Mrs Ramsay is of so good a family and Mumpy [Allan Ramsay] himself so rich they are no discredit', wrote the aspiring young Robert Adam6 who, with Clérisseau, Pêcheux, Piranesi, the traveller Robert Wood and the Abbé Grant, became one of Ramsay's closest associates. Ramsay and Piranesi in turn attended Adam's conversazioni. Ramsay showed none of the Jacobite ambivalence of his previous youthful visit and Andrew Lumisden was received with indifference. In March 1755 his daughter Amelia was born in Rome (later Lady Campbell; d. 1813). In May and June (and again in September) they went on an excursion to Tivoli, where they stayed in the Villa d'Este. It was there that Ramsay began his search for Horace's villa. In May 1756 he was sketching Virgil's tomb at Posillipo (SNG) in the course of a short visit to Naples. On their return journey to Rome they visited Monte Cassino where Ramsay studied Solimena's large paintings in the monastery choir. In the summer of 1756 Ramsay was ill and spent a time convalescing in Viterbo, Adam meanwhile reporting he was consumptive and likely to die. But the Ramsays left Rome together in May 1757 for Florence, where Allan painted for the Master of Trinity a copy of Galileo's portrait by Sutterman in the Uffizi (Trinity, Camb.). They returned home through Germany and Holland, the outbreak of the Seven Years War preventing a return through France. They were home by November.  Throughout this second visit Ramsay drew and painted. On his way to Rome he had stayed in Florence to copy in the Uffizi and in Rome he made many copies from old masters, particularly Domenichino, and he again attended life classes in the French Academy. Late in 1755 Ramsay's pupil, David Martin, joined him in Rome, bringing out with him, it was said, boxes of Ramsay's drawings to be shown at the Accademia di S.Luca (see Martin). Ramsay again met Batoni, whose portraits of British travellers influenced his own work. Ramsay painted Robert Wood, John Burgoyne, the Abbé Grant and Robert Adam, besides himself and his wife (both priv. coll.); in January 1756 Adam mischievously wrote that only Mrs Ramsay and Wood were finished, 'the others half done so that [Ramsay] has properly come to Italy to have the name of it'.7 The Grant portrait is now known only through a drawing and that of Adam is untraced.  Ramsay's third visit began in 1775, when he was sixty-two and increasingly afflicted with rheumatic pains following a fall in 1772 which had put an end to his painting activities.8 He set out with his wife and his daughter Amelia for Rome. Apparently he tried the baths at Pisa and Casiano while on his way, but they were ineffectual; the taste of the latter being 'somewhat like that of Tunbridge Wells, but twenty times stronger'.9 On 21 October Father Thorpe noted an infirm Ramsay with his wife and daughter in Rome.10 There he sat to Michael Foy for his bust (SNPG), showing him stern-faced ('mumpy' as Adam would have said) and wearing a toga. He spent his time in antiquarian pursuits, Fuseli commenting on Ramsay's fondness for 'tracing on dubious vestiges the haunts of ancient genius and learning'. The two shared a love of scholarship and visited Turin together to see the works of a 'learned but uninspired painter'. In July and August 1776 Ramsay went to the Isle of Ischia, to take the baths. There was a temporary recovery and Ramsay began to draw again; a Self-portrait of 1776 is in the NPG and a study of his wife in the SNG.  But his most sustained activity was the investigation of Horace's Sabine Villa. He identified the site in the Licenza valley (which is still accepted); Mrs Ramsay became his amanuensis and the young Jacob More assisted him by drawing views. In the summer of 1777 Count Orsini lent Ramsay rooms in his palace at Licenza, where More joined him in June. This was a happy break, Ramsay later recalling how the inhabitants were themselves 'antiquities', admirable in their 'contented poverty' and 'innocence'. On 28 June 1777 the Ramsays returned to Rome and by October they were back in London. Ramsay's second wife died on 4 March 1782 and, unprepared to withstand 'the cold and damp of another of our winters', he returned to Italy for a fourth and last time, an 'old and enfeebled scholar-painter'. He was accompanied by his fourteeen-year-old son John who kept a travel journal.11 They had reached Rome by 11 December, and John described copying out texts for his father, or reading to him from the classics, as well as taking drawing lessons from Batoni (now in his mid-seventies). Ramsay attracted many visitors in Rome; the artists' names recurring most frequently in his diary are J.R. Cozens, H.D. Hamilton, Gavin Hamilton, Jacob More and Angelica Kauffman. Ramsay would hold small literary parties which were on occasion attended by Lords Breadalbane, Cowper, Clive and Shaftesbury. The Abbé Grant was still in Rome and another Catholic priest, Father Jacquier, a French astronomer and mathematician, was engaged to teach John Ramsay geometry. Ramsay's researches on Horace's Sabine villa continued and Philipp Hackert, then painter to the King of Naples, had made ten views of Licenza which Ramsay discussed with him. On 9 April 1783 Ramsay and his son left Rome and made a slow progress to Naples, where they lodged on the Chiaja. William Hamilton became a close and solicitous friend until his departure in May; he played Handel sonatas to Ramsay on his violin, while Ramsay gave him a copy of his new pamphlet (printed in Florence in 1783) On the Right of Conquest (a defence of imperial power). To Charles Parker he explained the origins of triglyphs and produced a rather far-fetched idea of the origins of flutings.12 While he talked with Lord Tylney, his son John climbed Vesuvius and visited Herculaneum with Lord Grandison (1 May). Later that month father and son visited Lake Avernus and then Pompeii, Salerno, Eboli and Paestum. They left Naples late in June, sailing to Terracina, then to Rome. On 17 July they went to Tivoli for a month, Ramsay anxious to complete his treatise on Horace's villa. On 7 August he began to paint a portrait of his son which was completed by 23 September (untraced).  When they returned to Rome on 18 August they found another invitation from Count Orsini to stay in Licenza, and they duly returned, arriving on the 27th and staying to 15 September. Hackert had meanwhile produced his map of Licenza. They finally left Rome on 4 October, spending the winter in Florence. Horace Mann, aged seventy-eight, carefully tended Ramsay, aged seventy-one. Robert Merry rather surprisingly persuaded Ramsay to contribute some verses to the Arno Miscellany (Ramsay was 'Disporting and playing at leap-frog with brats', commented Horace Walpole). John continued visiting collections, while his father stayed indoors. John Ramsay's journal ends on 5 May 1784 in Florence; he had been sitting to H.D. Hamilton on 26, 28, 29 April and 3 and 4 May. That summer his father, hearing that his married daughter Amelia was about to return to London from the West Indies, determined to return home. The journey, however, proved too much for his frail constitution and he died on arriving at Dover on 10 August, without seeing his daughter again.
On the publication of his Vie de Fénélon in 1723, Ramsay was invited to become tutor to the young Stuart princes in Rome.1 Stosch reported his arrival in January 1724, and said he was then ill from a fall from his chaise. In March he had been wounded by a fellow Jacobite, Thomas Forster, and had only been restrained from killing him in retaliation by the intervention of Hay [Col. John Hay?]. In November, having been 'for several months governor to the pretender's son' he had left for France. He had shocked the clergy 'by his principles as he is far from bigoted and has a French manner of reasoning freely about all sorts of matters. An owl among the other birds'. But Ramsay was again in Rome in December 1725 with the young Charles Stuart.2 On 3 July 1726 he was in Padua with Richard Hales,3 on his way back to Paris, bringing a portrait of the young Prince to Father Innes.4 The Pretender later wrote that he would never have Ramsay back: 'Ramsay is an odd body. He exposed himself strangely here to myself and others, but as yett I will be charitable enough to think him a madd man'.5




Raper was in Florence in September 1741 when Horace Mann thought him 'An awkward young man'; he had carried a crochette of diamonds from Turin to Genoa for Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.1 In May 1742 Raper was in Rome sitting to Masucci (the portrait untraced).2

The 10th Earl of Huntingdon received his two nephews, Francis and John Theophilus Rawdon, in Italy in 1773, initially with the intention that they should study in Turin.1 But the three came to Parma on 19 November,2 and passed through Florence and Rome to Naples, where Lord Huntingdon and Francis Rawdon arrived in January 1774, Huntingdon intending to spend 'at least a year' there.3 It is not clear whether Theophilus was also at Naples, and his name does not recur. While he was in Naples and Ischia, Francis Rawdon wrote several times to his father.4 He described the fish in Naples, and a kind of shallow, clear bath where Sir William Hamilton kept all manner of sea fish; the Neapolitans he thought 'dreadful Eaters of Cats', while the lazzaroni made 'not the least scruple of eating Sheep & cattle that die a natural death'; he had enjoyed eating 'the old Roman Dish viz: the paps of a Sow which had just pigg'd' (16 Jul. 1774). When the air was bad he went to Ischia; he thought it wrong of English physicians to send their patients to Naples 'since the steams formed by subterraneaeous fires, rise in every part around Naples, [and] must impregnate the air strongly with sulphurous or vitriolic particles'. George and Hamilton, the two sons of Lord Morton, who came to Ischia from Naples, their arms and faces covered with a thick rash, were soon cured, but both broke out again the day after returning to Naples; the same had also happened to a Miss Dundas; extreme heat had led to the death of Sir William Duncan, and the mention of death led Francis to describe some recent Neapolitan murders (20 Sep. 1774). In a letter from Ischia (28 Aug. 1774) Francis discussed volcanoes and lava deposits. He described how Sir William Hamilton had found it took 1000 years to produce 2 to 3 inches of soil, a calculation which violently upset Christian chronology: 'but Sir William does not mention [it] in public on account of their contradicting the chronology of Moses so palpably. The Cano Recupezo [Giulio Cesare Recupito], who was writing the natural history of Aetna, was warned by the Jesuits not to disagree in opinion with Moses, upon which he stopped his work, declaring he could not in conscience allow the Mountain to be only 6000 years old-'. Lord Huntingdon left Naples just before 25 October 1774, proposing to be in England by Christmas and his nephews presumably left with him.5 Francis wrote from Rome in December when he was much employed in the pursuit of virtù. He understood that it would be unpardonable to have been to Rome and not seen everything, 'but surely one visits the greater part of the antiquities for the sake of having it to say that one has seen them, than from any prospect of receiving either instruction or pleasure from their examination'. He was but little interested in knowing whether 'Maecena's Villa' at Tivoli stood on this part of the town or any other or whether a foundation belonged to the Temple of Vesta or any other - 'I know that this is a very heterodox opinion, and that I should be looked upon as a barbarian by the generality of people for not admiring any thing that was antique. I must own that I think we carry our admiration of the ancients too far - In praising their works, we are too apt to forget those of modern times, many of which would perhaps on impartial examination surpass some of the most boasted pieces of antiquity - e.g. no other nation ever had a temple which could be compared to St Peter's - [the] ancients never attained understanding of architecture to raise a cupola on four piers'; the fine houses of Rome were magnificent, and contrasted with those at Pompeii which seemed inconvenient and ill-built, with small, but handsomely rooms jumbled in great confusion. Francis then described the murder of a coachman in Rome, concluding that 'people are very much mistaken when they say that young Englishmen are apt by travelling to imbibe wrong ideas of law and Justice ... I am more and more convinced that our own country is the only one in the world for a man to live in' (8 Dec. 1774). He ended this letter saying he intended to leave for Vienna the following day, and his last letter is dated Vienna, 29 January 1775. It described his journey via Loreto and Ancona to Venice, where Lord Huntington's 'excellent letter of recommendation' to 'the Venetian Nobility, or to the Corps Diplomatique' ensured that within 'a very few days I was perfectly at home in Venice'. By June 1775 he was in America with his regiment.
It was said that Rawdon was sent to travel in order to cure him of a passion in Ireland, but he embarked on another affair in Montauban and Joseph Spence suggested that, in Italy, he was 'prodigiously in love in every town he makes any stay at'.1 Rawdon had also come from the south of France to Leghorn in the hope of seeing his younger brother, Arthur, a naval officer whose ship was to be there, but it is unclear whether they then met.2 He visited Genoa ('better worth seeing than all the Kingdom of France') where Lord Aubrey Beauclerk introduced him to the nobility. He was overwhelmed by the 'Palaces, Pictures and Statues'. It was very hot, so that they slept by day and walked at night, and the Governor 'ordered all the dogs in the town to be killed for fear of their going mad, which was done before night'. He intended spending a month in Siena, where the best Italian was spoken, in order to study the language (20 Jul. 1739).  It was still very hot in Siena when he wrote on 27 August, and he intended being at Rome within about ten days. But he either stayed much longer or returned later, since in the spring of 1740, with Sir Roger Newdigate and Sir Francis Dashwood, Rawdon was being guided round Rome by Mark Parker. Rawdon was apparently apprehensive of assassination by the Jacobites in Rome; Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who remembered this, had met him in Venice (presumably in May 1740).3 Rawdon next appeared with his brother Arthur in Turin at the end of May 1740, and they were setting out for France on 2 June. Spence then met them both for the first time: he thought Sir John a 'good-natured good sort of man', and his brother 'a very sensible young man, and too modest for an Irishman'.4 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu later recalled that he had bought pictures in Italy 'not because he wanted to buy, but because somebody or other wanted to sell', and he was said to have guessed that the Sublime Porte was Leghorn (CP).

He travelled in Italy with his brother, the antiquarian Richard, but on three occasions they appear to have been apart. On 10 December 1722 Constantine left Richard in Florence and went to Bologna; on 18 June 1725 Constantine left Richard in Rome to go to Florence, and on 12 November 1725 Constantine alone signed the matriculation book at Padua.1 In May 1724 Richard mentioned that Constantine had copied inscriptions from the English cemetery in Leghorn.  Constantine is said to have been living in Venice when Richard died in 1755 (DNB).
A distinguished antiquarian, a staunch non-juror and a Jacobite, Rawlinson spent five years in Italy with his brother Constantine. He was an industrious traveller, constantly visiting churches, libraries and palaces, observing religious ceremonies and copying inscriptions and epitaphs. He witnessed with a detached curiosity a number of public executions and the administration of the strappa di corda. He had acquaintance with the Pretender's entourage in Rome, and as a scholar he met a number of collectors, artists and men of letters. Rawlinson's journal (of which two volumes covering mid-May to mid-December 1723 are missing), otherwise provides a detailed itinerary (Rawlinson jnl.MSS), and his careful notes of other travellers, their education and their titles, have been used throughout this Dictionary. Rawlinson reached Italy late in 1720, having travelled through France and Germany. He spent six months in Rome, from December 1720 to June 1721, staying at 'Madame Petits dans la Piazza d'Espagna' before moving to lodgings 'at the house of Signior Belbe over agt the Greek Church'. He was at once able to indulge his Jacobite loyalties by observing the Pretender at his devotions on Christmas day and by describing at length the birth of Charles, the Young Pretender, on 31 December. During the birth 'a silly whim was observed of a bigotted Priest bringing the Cloak of St John the Baptist from some repository to work wonders and an easy labour, but the wiser world smiled only at the folly'. Rawlinson recorded his impatience with such superstition on several occasions. On 12 February 1721 he observed the Pretender with his wife at the opera (Griselida) and described how, as soon as they were seated, 'a young child representing a naked angel descended from the clouds or top of the Theatre holding a silver plate in which were two books of the opera, and papers of verses in praise of the author, which he presented to the C[hevalier] and his spouse'. Rawlinson commissioned portraits of the Pretender and his wife, apparently his only acts of patronage. On 3 April he received from 'Hieronymo Peschi' [Girolamo Pesci] 'my picture' (apparently of the Pretender) and paid him an additional pistole 'in earnest for a ristretto of my Lady' (a portrait of the Pretender's wife); he recorded the Princess sitting to Pesci on 16 and 24 April. He had previously visited Antonio David whose full-length portraits of the Pretender and his wife Rawlinson thought 'inferiour to none but that done by Sign.Hieronymno Peche' ( 25 Feb. 1721). On 4 April Rawlinson succinctly noted 'this day was began the other gentleman by Signore Anton Malbranche, a Painter, ... son of the brother of the famous French Jesuit of that name'.  Over half of his stay in Italy was to be spent in Rome: eight months in 1721, at least three in 1723 (when the journal is incomplete) and fourteen months from April 1724 to June 1725, when he began his leisurely homeward journey. In this time he saw three Popes: Clement XI died on 19 March 1721 and Rawlinson witnessed the coronation of his successor Innocent XIII on 17 May; on 4 June 1724 he witnessed the coronation of Benedict XIII. Rawlinson was always well occupied in Rome. During his first stay he took a language master and visited libraries, though not always with success, as when he asked in the 'Library of the Minerva' to see 'Ficoroni's book agt Montfaucon', but was told it was prohibited, 'and as such I found it on the Index Expurgatorius dum corrigatur' (16 Apr. 1721). He met the medallist Ottone Hamerani and saw 'the collection of the Popes medals' struck by him both in copper and silver (14 Dec. 1720). On 25 June 1721 he arrived at Naples to stay at the Three Kings 'a bad house with worse beds'. He met the antiquary Giovanni Ottavio Fabio, 'once a goldsmith of this place, but now commenced an antiquary, he shewed me two Roman seals for which he demanded extravagantly' (16 Jul. 1721). Under an arch in the upper part of the entrance to the catacombs of the church of S.Gennaro Rawlinson noticed that a number of Englishmen had written their names, and with his almost indiscriminate curiosity he duly returned to transcribe them (12, 29 Jul.). 'With much fatigue' he climbed Vesuvius before departing on 4 October. Back in Rome he learned that his language master had died but within four days he had another, 'Signore delaMothe'. He was soon looking at private collections, as that of 'Sign. Gio: And. Lorenzani' ... 'the largest Musaeum I have seen' (7 Nov. 1721) and he talked again with Hamerani (28 Oct. 1721). On 12 December he left to spend six months in the Veneto and Tuscany. He had a 'scandalous room and as bad a bed' at the Scudo di Francia at Venice, and his discomfort increased with the news that a fire at S. Giorgio Maggiore had destroyed 'some pictures of Tintoretto and other eminent hands' (31 Jan. 1722). At Padua, where he remarked on (and, of course, transcribed) several sly comments written by Englishmen in the University Visitors' Book (see John Lock), Rawlinson received 'a Testimonial of my Matriculation ... from the Vice Chancellor Il dottore Bartolomeo Sellari for which I paid him three Lyre venetiane' (23 Mar. 1722). He was in Tuscany in June and was walking 'about the Gallery of the Grand Duke' where he saw 'the fine statues with Sigr Galileo' (1 Jul. 1722). At Leghorn he found in the British consul's house the chaplain's room 'with benches, a reading desk and a pulpit' and he inspected the collection of 'Cameos and intagli' assembled by the chaplain [Benjamin Crowe] (5 Jul.). Two days later he was able to collect his books which had arrived at Leghorn and he was 'very much busyed in pulling the covers off' in 'Mr Pope's ware House'. Then he was able to enjoy 'English beef, Punch and Wine' with Captain Hope on board ship (11 Jul.). Typical of Rawlinson's days, on the afternoon of 5 September in Florence he inspected 'the Fortress of Florence' with Lord Blandford (see William, Viscout Rialton), watched 'Mr Joyce' [William Joy], a strong man, perform and in the evening dined with the British envoy, Henry Davenant. In January 1723 he came back to Rome, and there is then a gap in his journal between 15 May and 12 December, when he is in Naples, about to embark for a brief visit to Sicily and Malta.  He returned to Naples on 6 March 1724 and on 11 April he was in Rome, where he stayed over a year, constantly occupied with sight-seeing, the close observation of travellers and meeting artists and collectors. On 3 April he visited G.B. Pozzo 'who works very curiously in Ivory of which he shewed us severall specimens' and he saw 'the collection of Sign van Linten Studio a Fleming who paints views and Lanskips very excellently' (3 May 1724). In July he went to the school of Bernardo Luti (who had recently died), where there were 'severall pictures unfinished, a vast number of prints and drawings, for all which were demanded 16000 Roman Crownes, amongst the last there is a variety of good, as well as large number of rubbish'. On 17 October he waited on Baron Stosch (at the time still an antiquarian rather than a Hanoverian agent) 'who in very civil manner entertained me, shewed me his vast work he had entered upon to collect all the remarkable fabrick &c of Rome, to supply the prints by draughts'. Rawlinson again called on him on 4 February 1725, to see 'severall drawings of Intagli, in his possession, made by the Cavaliere Odam, very well executed'. On 9 March 1725 he saw the drawings and prints which Thomas Foley had just bought from Niccolo Pio ('who Formerly disposed of a large collection of the farmer Mongr Croizat' [Crozat]). In April he inspected a collection of intaglios and cameos belonging to Antonio Borioni, the apothecary, and he visited 'the palace of the nephew of the Caval. Bernini, where under a curtain is that famous statue of Truth' which had been entailed to his family [now Borghese].  Before finally leaving Rome on 20 June 1725 he heard a stern address from the Pope on the evils of nepotism (15 Apr.) and saw the 'laurelling' of 'Cavr. Perfetti of Siena' once famous for his extempore poetry on all sorts of subjects'; the last time this was done, Rawlinson observed, was for Petrarch soon after 1300. On 18 July he arrived in Venice and he was soon in contact with Joseph Smith, inspecting 'his fine library where are about 227 books printed before 1500 ... a large collection of Topography and History, books on the Italian language and many other curious pieces which he very frankly shewed to me' (20 Jul.). On 12 September 1725 the French ambassador held a masquerade to mark the accession of Louis XV, but it was meanly done and attracted the 'contempt and laughter of Venice'. In October Rawlinson was looking at miscellaneous antiquities at Bologna (where he mentioned the collectors Canonico Ghiselini, Dottore Cesi, Buonfiglioli and Tacconi).  Rawlinson left Genoa on 22 January 1726 for Toulon. Three months later he was back in England bringing his own miscellaneous collection of manuscripts, coins, medals and curiosities (DNB).


Frequently mentioned in Father Thorpe's letters,1 Dr Rayment appears to have been a Catholic physician living in or near Rome in semi-retirement from at least October 1774 to after June 1790. He was a distant relation of Lady Arundell (22 Oct. 1774*). Thorpe described him as wishing to withdraw from 'High Life' and live in some community (19 Oct. 1774*). Thorpe once met him 'reading his prayer book, near St Pauls extra muros, where he told me that it was his twelfth visit whereby he must have walked about 150 miles already in these pious pilgrimages' (18 Mar. 1775) and in 1776 he was said to be leading a calm and sedate life among the Carmelites (23 Nov. 1776). In 1779 he was suffering from a paralytic disorder which undermined his patients' confidence (4 Oct. 1779); Thorpe last mentioned him in Rome on 16 June 1790.
By December 1736 Lord Raymond and his governor had been in Florence a month with Lord Barrington.1 During the Carnival in March they assisted Lord Middlesex in presenting 'une masque superbe', and the same three afterwards produced an opera in Lucca, see Charles, Earl of Middlesex. Raymond arrived in Venice on 29 May 1737,2 but was back in Florence in August, when he witnessed the murder of Denys Wright.3 In July 1738 he returned to Florence from Venice with Lord Middlesex4 and he was apparently an active member of the Masonic Lodge which the latter had founded there.5 For reasons which are not clear, on 16 April 1739 Cardinal Corsini was asking the Grand Duke to expel both Lord Raymond and Stosch from Florence, but Raymond was back in England by 3 May 1739, when he was elected Grand Master of the Masonic Order in England.5 Horace Mann later recalled that Raymond had offered Stosch £100 for his intaglio Meleager.6
Raymond was in Rome with his governor Salvio.1 A Raymond, presumably the same, was in Florence the following February, declining to call on the 5th Viscount Bulkeley who was known for his Jacobite sympathies.2
He had arrived in Venice for the Carnival by 20 December 1709.1 'J. Reade de Brockethall' was in Padua on 11 March 1711,2 and subsequently went on to Rome. There he died of smallpox on 22 February 1712, William Kent describing him as 'a patron of the Artes'.3 He was buried at Brocket on 11 June (CB).
Katherine Read was described late in life by Fanny Burney as melancholy, shrewd and clever, 'most exceedingly ugly' and negligent in her dress.1 In 1751, aged twenty-seven and having already studied under Quentin de la Tour in Paris, she went alone to Italy to complete her training.2 On 16 June 1751 she wrote to her eldest brother from Rome 'I have had no money but from you since I came abroad ... I am obliged to board, otherwise I could live at a third of the expense; this you may be believe is no small vexation'. In the same letter she said she was studying under L.-G. Blanchet, and copying portraits by Dolci and Van Dyck; 'I apply so constantly and take every decent method of improvement that I think it must be impossible I can miss. I am but in a manner beginning to be known here'. She had met Cardinal Albani and was copying four heads by Rosalba Carriera from his collection. In her next letter of 6 January 1752 she said she had painted two Italian Princesses and was soon to paint Prince Caesarini's brother, but payment, she complained, was made only with trinkets, 'for you must know that Italians despise people so much that are obliged to do anything for money'. Lord Charlemont, however, would pay her for the profile she was to paint of the marchesa Gabrielli; she had also drawn some pastel heads, succeeding beyond her expectation. Since 'no unmarried woman is ever seen in the street alone', the Abbé Grant became her regular companion. In January 1752 the Abbé wrote to Katherine's brother confirming her 'very great talent' in pastels and saying that were it not that her sex prevented her from attending academies, she would doubtless 'shine wonderfully' at history painting too. In June 1752 Cardinal Albani sat to her; 'she is the first foreigner', commented Grant, 'that ever one of such personages vouchsafed to sit to'. In August Albani was recommending her to Bubb Dodington in England.3  On 20 March 1753 she was in Capua (accompanied by 'Guillermo Rigg' [Thomas Rigge?]) on her way to Naples.4 She wrote a third time to her brother on 6 April 1753, saying she had seen in Naples pictures belonging to the King, Prince Sabino and the Duke della Torre, but the Carthusians, 'those superstitious biggots', would not allow a female to see their pictures. It appears that from Naples she returned home through Bologna and Turin,5 as well as Venice, where she met and sat to Rosalba Carriera. On 20 August 1753 she wrote from Paris an affectionate letter to Rosalba in Venice as 'la Demoiselle qui a fait mon Portrait'. Read was then about to return to London with her father who had come to meet her.6 On 31 May 1756 she wrote again to Rosalba: 'je vous considere comme une personne remplie d'inspiration et d'idées vraiment belles et angeliques'.7

His portrait by Rosalba Carriera, identified by a contemporary inscription, is in the NG Washington; another was sold in 1976 (Sotheby's, 5 Jul.); one of these portraits was completed in April 1744 (Sani 1985, 693, and 1988, nos.325-6).



Sir Peter Redmond, a Jacobite, who had previously been in Portugal and Spain, arrived at Urbino on 10 December 1717 with Robert Creagh.1 On 14 January 1718 he was in Loreto and by the 26th he was in Rome. There he noted the operas were principally concerned with 'dethroning usurpers and restoring lawful kings' and he intended staying '8 or 10 days till the weather mends, for in that time I shall be cloyed with the curiosities of Rome, which are indeed many'. But his principal concern was diplomatic, involving the raising of arms for the Jacobite cause in Spain. On 5 February, still waiting for the weather to clear, he had begun to be 'pretty well wearied of Rome', and on 12 February he explained that after 'one has seen St Peter's within and without and a few other principal things, the lesser curiosities have no taste hardly with me. If a good picture or statue strikes my fancy ... I am pleased with it for a while, but I am not virtuoso enough to enquire and fill my memory with the names ... and I am indifferent whether it be ancient or modern'. Following an interview with the Pope and other Cardinals, he was proposing to leave Rome early in March. By 17 March he was back in Urbino, and he left soon after with Colonel Dominic Sheldon. They were in Turin by 30 March, having travelled through Bologna and Piacenza, and Redmond was in Paris by 30 May on his way to Madrid. 'Sir Peter Redmond', a Catholic, presumably the same, arrived in Leghorn from Marseilles on 19 December 1731 and set out straight away for Rome; 'Sir Peter Redmond or Redmayne' was still there in June 1732, seeming 'to pass there for a great statesman'.2 Ruvigny, however, suggests that the Jacobite Redmond may have died before 26 March 1732.
Reid is said to have founded a second Masonic Lodge at Florence at the same time as the English Lodge (see Charles, Earl of Middlesex), but for a less aristocratic membership; some sixty Florentines subscribed (Lepper 1950, 23).A young Scot who in 1764 had spent nine years in Rome 'allways employd in the pursuit of excellent studys'; the Abbé Grant recommended him warmly to James Grant (Seafield MSS, GD 248/99/3, 6 May 1764).
Reilly was living on the Corso in the same house as James Forrester and Joseph Nollekens at Easter 1768.1 He wrote to Charles Townley from Rome on 26 February 1767, and from Florence on 28 December 1767 and 2 May and 7 June 1768.2
Reinagle was on the Continent '18 months - 10 months of which He had bad health - an ague & a bilious complaint'.1 In January 1796 he came from Germany to Verona where he stayed three days before going on to Mantua.2 At Easter 1796, and again at Easter 1797, he was listed in Rome living in the Via Babuino in the Casa di S.Spirito.3 By June 1796 he was in the service of the 4th Earl of Bristol, who was then urgently seeking permission for him to paint at Sora 'in the Kingdom of Naples' until 15 November 1796.4 That year Reinagle exhibited four landscapes at the RA, giving his address as 'Rome'. On 24 February 1797 Sir William Hamilton applied for permission for Henry [Edward?] Swinburne 'and his painters' Richard Duppa and Reinagle to draw around Naples and to have passports for Sicily but, according to a letter Duppa later wrote to Farington, without success.5 But in May Reinagle succeeded in visiting Paestum and Capri with Henry Thomson, Duppa and Swinburne. Reinagle later said that at Naples 'He was only permitted to draw views partially, and was not allowed to draw at Abruzzo, this on acct. of the jealousy of the times by an order from the King of Naples'.6 Reinagle was back in London by the spring of 1798 when he gave his address as London at the RA exhibition. He exhibited many Italian views (principally Neapolitan) over the ensuing years.

She was first in Italy as Anne Curry, being escorted by Mrs Tobias Smollett in 1764-5, see Smollett. On 5 June 1769 she married in Florence the merchant George Renner (who was probably born in Bremen), the marriage witnessed by Tobias Smollett.1 In February 1773 she sailed from Leghorn taking some clothes to Sir John Dick's sister in Durham.2 Smollett's widow lived with the Renners from 1771 to her death in 1791, and when Anne Renner died in Leghorn on 28 February 1811 she was buried in the Protestant cemetery in Leghorn alongside Mrs Smollett.3 Her husband had died on 19 December 1790 aged 85 and was also buried in Leghorn.3
An easy, pleasant, sensible Man of five or six & twenty ... [whose] estate is near Atherstone',1 He was seen by John Ramsay in Florence in November 1783.2 Repington was in Rome in December 1783,3 and Naples in February 1784.4 He was again in Rome between 11 March and 24 April 1784, often in the company of the Berrys, Jonas Brooke, the Asshetons, and Sir George Warren.5 By 12 May he was in Venice with Charles Parker (they had previously met in Rome), and they decided to travel home together.1 On 19 May Parkinson saw Repington in Venice with a Mr Musgrave, the Asshetons, [H.D.?] Hamilton and Thomas Pitt.4 By 14 July Repington and Parker were in Lyons6 and they travelled back through Vienna and Dresden.4


It is unclear how Reveley reached Italy, but he was certainly at Rome in 1784 when Thomas Maynard Heselrige [Hesilrige] recommended him to Sir Richard Worsley as a draughtsman.1 Reveley made a number of watercolours in Rome and its environs (two are YCBA) and he also made designs in Italy, sending in 1785 an elevation of a theatre for music for exhibition at the RA. Worsley subsequently engaged Reveley, whom he described as an English artist already living in Rome, to accompany him on a tour of Greece and Egypt 'to make drawings of Architecture, & the most interesting ruins'2 (some of his drawings were in Reveley's sale at Christie's, 11-12 May 1801). Later in life Reveley transcribed part of his journal of travel with Worsley as the sole entry under the letter 'J' of his highly idiosyncratic 'Manuscript Material for a Dictionary of Architecture, and of a Journey through Italy, Greece and Egypt, etc.' (RIBA). They left Rome on 12 February 1785, travelling via Ariccia (where Reveley thought Bernini's church 'a very bad copy of one of the finest buildings in the world [the Pantheon]') along the Appian Way. Their entry to the Kingdom of Naples at Fondi was not propitious, Reveley complaining that his lodgings had no glass or paper on the windows and that the straw beds were full of bugs. On 15 February, whilst en route to Capua, the travellers had a view of the erupting Vesuvius; the palace at Caserta Reveley thought 'not in good taste'. A diversion was made to Arienzo and Benevento, principally to see the Arch of Trajan, before they proceeded to Salerno. Between 20 and 25 February Reveley and Worsley made an excursion to Paestum, where Reveley encountered ancient Greek architecture (and his enthusiasm for the style subsequently earned him the nickname of 'the Athenian'). Two of his drawings of Paestum survive (YCBA) and a third dated 1786 (VAM) is from the later visit mentioned in his 'Dictionary'. At Brindisi he was much impressed by the columns supposedly erected as beacons by Augustus and, despite suffering from a fever, he made a drawing (now YCBA). They continued to Otranto, where Reveley found the castle 'a pitiful ruin'. On 26 March they finally set sail for Malta and the journal ends with their arrival at Rhodes on 21 July 1785. Reveley was back at Rome in the autumn of 1786. His 'Dictionary' is full of (mainly undated) 'Observations made on the Spot' in Rome, some of them in association with James Byres. On 10 September he saw an obelisk raised onto its pedestal, the event taking place 'amidst the acclamations of the people, & the castle of St Angelo firing'. Although this description appears in a section of the dictionary describing the basilica of St Peter's, Reveley actually witnessed the erection of the obelisk in front of the Quirinal Palace by Giovanni Antinori, one of a number of obelisk placements undertaken by Pius VI. A month later Peter Cowling described how he had walked with Reveley to the Villa Borghese,3 and at Easter 1787 'Monsu Riveley Archo.Inglese - 25' was living above the Gioco Liscio on the Piazza Mignanelli.4 On 12 July of that year he made a close inspection of the Temple of Antoninus and Faustina in the Republican Forum, during which he 'went into a cellar under the portico where the remainder of the columns are to be partly seen'. His architectural studies continued in 1788. He described the cutting up of an ancient red granite column to repair the Campo Marzio obelisk (now in front of the Italian parliament), and acquired a number of architectural casts at Rome (Reveley sale 1801). In March 1788, however, his life underwent a dramatic change when he married Miss James, as Elizabeth Cooper explained to George Cumberland.5 At eleven o'clock one evening Reveley had been caught in flagrante with Miss James by her father; the pair were obliged to run almost naked to the architect's lodgings, with the irate father in pursuit; the next night they were married by an English clergyman and, since her father would provide nothing, various ladies in Rome collected money to buy the unfortunate bride some clothes.  By the late summer of 1788 the architect, presumably with his wife, was on his way home to England. It is certain that his journey took him to Venice, where he judged Palladio's churches harshly, and to Milan, where he thought the cathedral 'would scarcely be finished by the day of judgement'. From his 'Dictionary' visits to many other northern Italian cities can be inferred: Ancona, Padua and Verona on the east side of the peninsula; Florence, Siena and Pisa in Tuscany, where his particular fascination was with the medieval towers; Bologna, Modena and Parma in central Italy; and Genoa. By August 1788, however, Reveley had definitely reached the south of France. On 13 May 1789 Charles Long told George Cumberland of a drawing then exhibited at the RA in London sent from Italy by Reveley.6
The name of 'Tho: Revell' was carved at the entrance to the Catacombs in the church of S.Gennaro in Naples before 1721,1 presumably the Revell who was 'agent victualler for his Majesty's Ships at Naples' in March 1720.2
Best known for his collaboration with James 'Athenian' Stuart on the Antiquities of Athens [1762-], Revett had set out for Italy in 1742. He left England on 22 September and after landing at Leghorn went straight to Rome.1 He had private means and spent some eight years in Italy, but the earlier years remain undocumented. By 1745 'Nicola Rivet Pitte ereto' was living on the Strada Carozze in Rome,2 and in 1748, 1749 and 1750 he was sharing lodgings on the Strada Felice with Gavin Hamilton and James Stuart.3 Revett studied painting in Rome under Benefial, and became a very competent architectural draughtsman. He was later described as 'a very good judge of the hands of the different schools of Italian painting' and, in the preface to the Antiquities, Stuart and Revett said they had spent 'six or seven years in the study of painting' before embarking on their survey of Greece.4  In April 1748, with Gavin Hamilton, James Stuart and Matthew Brettingham, Revett made a six-week tour to Naples, walking both ways,5 and it was in the course of this expedition that the idea of the Antiquities was born. Back in Rome, Lord Charlemont and Lord Malton helped sponsor their scheme to draw the most ancient buildings in Greece; the artists named were Revett, Stuart and Gavin Hamilton (who, however, was unable to travel with them).6 Stuart and Revett left Rome for Venice in March 1750 and, missing their boat for Greece, spent some months in the city, becoming acquainted with the British resident Sir James Gray, through whose agency they were elected to the Society of Dilettanti. They had spent three months at Pola on the Dalmatian coast before finally embarking for Athens in January 1751.
One Mr Raynolds who was a Member of Parliament' came to Venice for the Carnival with Vandeput in February 1710.1 'R. Reynell', with Richard Coffin and Peter Vandeput, was in Padua on 8 March.2
Ambitious, and with high ideals absorbed from Jonathan Richardson, the young Reynolds must have yearned for Italy, the mecca of any aspiring eighteenth-century artist; in fact, he owed his journey there to a chance encounter. In January 1749 Captain Augustus Keppel, en route for the Mediterranean, was obliged to put in to Plymouth for repairs; he stayed with his friend Lord Edgcumbe, who offered Reynolds a free passage south. Reynolds gratefully accepted, with the support of his two sisters, who lent him money. Reynolds's sojourn in Italy is recorded in ten surviving sketch-cum-notebooks, which contain hundreds of sketches, chiefly of paintings and sculpture, but also of buildings and scenery, together with copious notes about works of art, and some personal memoranda.1 Reynolds spent several months with Keppel in Minorca, painting portraits, before proceeding to Rome. Lodged in rooms in the former palace of the Queen of Sweden on the Trinita dei Monte, he wrote enthusiastically to Lord Edgcumbe, in one of the very few letters he seems to have written in Italy, 'I am now at the height of my wishes, in the midst of the greatest works of art the world has produced'. Later that year Reynolds ('Renelos') was living on the third floor of the English Coffee House in the Piazza di Spagna, where he was joined in 1751 by Patch. In 1752 Patch and Reynolds moved to the second floor of the Palazzo Zuccari, which had been converted into an inn catering especially for artists; later, possibly after his return from Naples ('Reynolds' was listed with a Mr Edgar at Capua on 1 April 1752),2 and before his departure for Florence, Reynolds is recorded in another part of the Palazzo.3 Reynolds certainly enjoyed the company of his compatriots in coffee-house society; he met prospective patrons there, like Sir William Lowther, and showed his satirical bent in a number of brilliant caricatures of Grand Tourists, executed in 1751.4 But he did not waste his time in frivolous pursuits, preferring 'to look more like a man of some Business and consequence no dangler nor Idler', and occupied most of his days with serious study, the purpose for which he had come. Unlike many students of the period Reynolds regarded copying as 'a delusive kind of industry'. He lists only six, all done in the spring and early summer of 1750. Nor did he seek to make money by painting copies for grand tourists to take home (the copy he offered to paint as a present for Lord Edgcumbe has not survived, if it was ever executed). Portraits he seems equally to have avoided, though he painted Joseph Wilton in Florence and the future Mrs William Chambers in Paris. Reynolds's concern was rather to fill his sketch-books with the conceptions of the old masters, thus providing for his future use a store of valuable pictorial ideas: 'This figure will serve for a fame', he wrote under a sketch of a Pasinelli in Bologna, and, under another, 'Serve for Time Discovering Truth'. Occasionally he made studies of whole compositions in order to describe dispositions of light and shade; usually however his sketches were of figure arrangements and single figures; often he made colour notes. He also laid down some practical rules for himself based on the methods of the sixteenth-century Venetians, especially Tintoretto, as, for example, 'When the second Mass of light is too great interpose some dark figure to divide the two'. Reynolds was overwhelmed by the Sistine Chapel which, on his first visit to the Vatican, he walked up and down for much of the day 'with great self-importance'. He later thought as he went in Florence from San Lorenzo to the Boboli Gardens, that it would be 'a difficult thing to determine' whether Michelangelo or Giovanni di Bologna was the greater sculptor. Although at first disappointed by Raphael's Stanze, he came to appreciate Raphael as the model of unaffected style, in contrast with whom he thought Michelangelo and Annibale Carracci were too wild, Domenichino too tame and Guido Reni too effeminate. Velazquez's Innocent X in the Palazzo Doria-Pamphilj he thought 'the finest portrait in the world'. Reynolds made no attempt to study or consort with the Italian artists of the day, such as Batoni. He did however know Zuccarelli, and presumably Nogari, since Richard Wilson had asked him to present his compliments to both artists on his arrival in Venice. Reynolds worried about the brevity of his stay in Florence, remembering his father's advice 'not to be in too great a hurry to show one self to the world but to lay in first as strong foundation as possible of knowledge & learning ... perhaps I shall ruin all and arrive at London without reputation and nobody that has ever heard of me when by staying here a month extraordinary my name will arrive before me'. Two months after leaving the city he was made a member of the Florentine Academy (3 September 1752). Reynolds brought back with him from Italy the fifteen-year-old Giuseppe Marchi, who was to be his pupil and remain his assistant most of his life. The collection of prints and drawings he had formed in Rome, which he left with his fellow-lodger, Simon Vierpyl, was shipped home by sea.  Reynolds's experiences in Italy provided the foundation of his later style; as Sir David Wilkie later remarked, 'Would Reynolds have done what he did, if he had never seen Italy?'
He was secretary to Charles Fane, the British minister in Tuscany, in 1735, acting as chargé d'affaires in March and August 1735 (Horn, 1:81. Wal.Corr., 37:33-4nn).

Soon after his election to Parliament in 1720, Rialton left for Italy. He was presumably the William 'Ryalton' at Padua on 30 December 1720 and 3 February 1721, on each occasion with G. de Chateauvieux, doubtless his guide.1 He made a rapid journey to Rome, arriving on 20 February2 and at Easter he was listed living near the Strada Paolina.3 By 7 March he had arrived in Naples,4 and he may have stayed on there, for he is next recorded returning to Rome from Naples on 4 April 1722.5 He was thereafter in Bologna in June and Florence in August and September. Rawlinson, who was quick to call him the Marquess of Blandford-the title Rialton acquired on the death of his grandfather, the Duke of Marlborough, on 16 June 1722-went with him to S.Maria Nuova on 1 September, and on the 10th Thomas Tyrrell was accompanying him.6 On 5 January 1723 he was again expected back in Rome.7  An unattributed portrait at Petworth of Rialton as Lord Blandford appears to have been painted in Italy.8 The Letter from an English Traveller at Rome to his Father of 6 May 1721 published in London in 1721, was said by Rawlinson to be by Rialton.9 It is largely concerned with the Pretender who had 'too much wit and learning for me: besides that he speaks with such an air of sincerity that I am apprehensive I should become half a Jacobite'.
Horace Mann in Florence gave him an introduction dated 26 March 1746 to Cardinal Albani in Rome; Rice had left Rome by June.1 In June 1747 he was in Vienna.2
Mr and Miss Rich were in Naples in April and May 1765. They visited Pompeii and Vesuvius with Sir William Farington and Mr and Mrs Clerk on 26 and 29 April, and sailed in the Bay of Naples on 2 May. On 13 May they were all in Rome, sharing with James Boswell an audience with the Pope (Farington jnl.MSS. Boswell, Italy, 86).


Richards was seen by James Martin in Rome on 16 and 17 December 1763, on the second occasion dining with a party which included Lord Ossory, Topham Beauclerk and the Abbé Grant.1 Richards passed through Capua on his way to Naples on 25 December 1763 with a Col. Cunningham, and he returned on his own on 12 January.2 Martin, who had seen him in Naples on 29 December, noticed in Rome on 9 July 1764 a bust of Richards by Nollekens which he thought 'very like'.1 This was presumably the Richards who had stayed in Florence sometime before March 1764.3
Elected Worts travelling scholar (see Thomas Kerrich) in 1794, one of his letters survives, dated Rome, 10 April 1795.
A draughtsman in the office of John Adam in Edinburgh by the late 1750s, George Richardson was sent to London to work for Robert on the latter's return from Italy. Robert Adam recommended his brother James to take a Scottish draughtsman with him on his impending grand tour, the Scots being 'more faithful and in every way preferable to the English if well chosen,' and James duly took Richardson with him to Italy in 1760. In Adam's company Richardson certainly visited Turin and Venice and went on the expedition to Pola in Istria. Adam appears to have sent him, with Giuseppe Sacco, a Veronese draughtsman, to Florence, where Adam eventually brought together his whole team (otherwise consisting of Clérisseau, young Zucchi, Domenico Cunego, and Agostino Scara). The party arrived in Rome on 24 February 1761. In August 1761 Richardson made formal complaint to Adam of Clérisseau's behaviour and disloyalty,1 an affair which was apparently mended. From Rome Richardson described his hopes and experiences to Archibald Shiells, a Midlothian patron.2 Despite his difficulties with Clérisseau, Richardson remained loyal, although he was well aware of his master's defects - he was both mean with allowances and secretive concerning his intentions.3 There were obvious compensations: 'as Mr Adam intends to do such great operations in this City it pleases me much that our residence will be so long fix'd in such a proper place for the improvement of our Studys', he wrote. He was, however, disappointed that Adam's scheme for a voyage to Greece, Asia Minor and the Levant came to nothing, 'for if we had compleated such a Grand Tour it must certainly have afforded great entertainment, improv'd Taste, & promis'd considerable advantages'. He was possibly the Richardson who assisted Thomas Jenkins in a dispute over pictures Jenkins had sold to Lord Fordwich (later 3rd Earl Cowper) in the autumn of 1760.4
An Account Of some of the Statues, Bas-reliefs, Drawings and Pictures in Italy, &c. with Remarks by Mr Richardson Sen. and Jun., published in 1722, became a work of the greatest importance for British travellers. It was essentially drawn from the notes made in Italy by Richardson junior. His itinerary may be deduced from the text and the date 1720-1 is implied from internal evidence, viz. he did not see Naples, Venice or Genoa, because of the 'terrible events' at Marseilles-which must refer both to the Anglo-Spanish conflict of 1718-20 and, more particularly, to the outbreak of the plague between June and December 1720-and he was in Rome before the death of Clement XI (19 March 1721). That his journey was relatively brief, probably within a year, is suggested by his father's remarks in the Preface; 'the Time my Son spent Abroad was indeed not Long', he travelled 'in a manner very Commodious, and Expeditious', furnished with 'an Excellent Constitution' and supplied with 'proper Recommendations' (it is clear, for example, that Richardson met Ficoroni in Florence). 'One Morning in the Month of July he was on the Road by One o'clock, Travell'd the whole Day in that Hot Season with the Intermission only of about two Hours at Noon; he then pass'd the Apennines, (a Rough, Tiresome way) came to Florence about six in the Evening, saw a Procession in the Cathedral, the whole Service held about three hours; then he went to his Inn, and after a very short Stay to the Opera, (which begins there at that time o'Night,) the next Morning he was busy in Seeing, and Observing what was Curious from one end of the Town to the other'. Richardson junior's notes were edited and expanded by his father; 'I am well satisfy'd my Son when he was Abroad was not Unmindful of his Own particular Pleasure, and Improvement from the Sight of those Fine things he went to see; but I am no less persuaded that what he Principally intended in making, and noting down his Observations was to gratify Me'.




Mr Richie a respectable merchant' was in charge of British affairs in Venice from August 1769 to August 1771 during the absence of the resident, Sir James Wright.1 Richie's correspondence with the previous resident, John Murray (then at Constantinople), in 1769-71 shows him to have been an old acquaintance and one well-received by Venetian scholars and professional men (within this period he witnessed the decline and death of Joseph Smith, whose executor he became).2 Richie was particularly helpful to Dr Charles Burney and the Mrs Richie in Venice in August 1770 who owned a Kirkman harpsichord was doubtless his wife.3 Richie was again chargé d'affaires during the absence of John Strange in 1775 and in 1776 he was appointed English consul at Venice in succession to John Udny. He was again chargé d'affaires from April 1786 to May 1790 (until Strange's successor, Sir Francis Vincent, arrived).4 Correspondence concerning his finances as consul 1776-98 is in a private collection [NRA 17556/0874, Berry of Tayfield].
The Duke of Richmond was in Italy with his younger brother Lord George Lennox, and a tutor, Abraham Trembley. By 26 March the brothers were in Rome,1 where each sat to Batoni, Richmond's portrait now being in a private collection with a replica at Goodwood (Clark/Bowron 188-9), and Richmond alone sat to Mengs (Goodwood). On 17 June Horace Mann reported that Richmond's servant had left Florence for Milan,2 and both Richmond and Lennox were back at Piddleton by 24 December, 'much admired, [George] however reckoned much handsomer and infinitely more the fashion'.3

Riddell was secretary to John Murray, British ambassador at Constantinople 1766-75. Murray died at Venice on 9 August 1775 on his journey home and Riddell was then sent on to England by John Strange with Murray's papers (Newdigate MSS, B 2286; Strange, 20 Aug. 1775).


Travelling with a Mr Boddington, a Mr Morgan and Ollyett Woodhouse, Edward Rigby made a brief visit to Turin in August 1789 which he described in letters home (subsequently edited by his daughter, Lady Eastlake). The party crossed the Alps on the new road through the Col di Tenda, 'a wonderful monument to human industry', and arrived in Turin on 6 August. Rigby thought it 'a filthy place ... full of ecclesiastics, soldiers and beggars', and the King's Palace 'presented too great a contrast to the things without to give us pleasure'. But they met with kindness from 'M. Negri', a local merchant, who accompanied them on their brief tour of the city. They left after two days to spend the remainder of their tour in France and Germany (Dr Rigby's letters from France &c., in 1789, ed. Ldy. Eastlake, 153-68; the letters are Bodl., MS Dep. C.115, e.43).
He called on the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome on 16 September 1703; they met again at 'a collation at the Jesuits' Villa' on 4 February 1704 and on 6 September Shrewsbury notes Rigby's departure from Rome (Shrewsbury Jnl.).
A 'Guillermo Rigg' was listed at Capua on 20 March 1753 with the painter Katherine Read (ASN cra 1257).

Riou was in Rome from 19 to 30 December 1750, when he wrote to his mother having returned from Naples a 'few days ago'. Whilst at Naples he had crossed to Capri for one week, and been hospitably received by Sir Nathaniel Thorold, a merchant of Naples who was building a house on the island. At Rome, Riou announced his intention of travelling to the south of France, but this can only have been a brief visit, for he had just taken a house in Rome at 5 shillings a day for himself and a servant. On 6 March 1753 Riou was to write of his 'constant application for almost three years to the beauties of fair Italy', and he made two sets of drawings in Rome around 1752: a design for a Royal Palace (Windsor Castle), and a bound volume of eleven drawings (Hoc Opusculum Perfecit Romae Stephanus Riou Londinensis Anno N[ostro] S[ignore] 1752; YCBA). This volume also contains drawings of Sansovino's prisons at Venice and Palladio's Arch in the Campo Marzio at Vicenza, which Riou had visited in late 1751 (when he met the British resident, Sir James Gray).2 At some stage during his travels Riou also visited Florence, since he was to describe the Venus de Medici in a letter of 1762.  On 6 March 1753 Riou was in Rome, preparing to leave for a twelve-month trip to Greece and the Levant. He was sad to leave Rome, not because of the festivities of the Carnival, which he found frivolous, but because he would miss his 'Vernal & autumnal retreats' in Tivoli, Frascati, Marino, Albano and Gensano. He left for Naples on 7 March, Ash Wednesday, 1753, with Thomas Barton, with whom he was 'preparing the way for numbers of our countrymen who are to follow' (although Barton alone had been listed at Capua on 3 March3). They had heard from William Hutchinson, a merchant at Naples, that an English ship bound for the Levant, was soon to leave. On their arrival at Naples on 8 March they found that the ship was quarantined for fifteen days and, meantime, Riou became Barton's cicerone in Naples. He took 'infinite pleasure' in having a 'second view' of the area, and they found the Dutch consul Davel to be especially friendly. They met their friend the Huguenot Charles Labelye (the architect of Westminster Bridge, who had already been in Naples in November/December 1752) and together visited Vesuvius, Pozzuoli, Baiae, Posillipo, Cuma and Arco Felice. Of the antiquities Riou especially mentioned Herculaneum, although the excavations were not very far advanced, even the theatre being insufficiently cleared to observe with exactness. Below Posillipo he was impressed by the shell of a large building called the Palace of Queen Joanna, and near Pozzuoli he commented on a recently excavated temple with baths. With an introduction to the curator Camillo Paderni, they visited the museum at Portici where, 'contrary to express orders', Riou sketched a painting of Chiron and Achilles in his hat while his companions distracted the attendant. Modern architecture in Naples did not impress him, with the single exception of the Royal Palace by Domenico Fontana. Being at Naples during Lent, Riou heard the singing in church of the celebrated castrato Gaetano Caffarelli and felt that 'nothing can be more pathetic & graceful than his manner of warbling'. Riou and his friends finally embarked on 13 April. On 17 April they were blown into a bay in Calabria and they only reached the Straits of Messina on the 24th. Riou was to meet James 'Athenian' Stuart and Nicholas Revett in Smyrna in May-June 1753. He was in Constantinople in February 1754, but he must have returned to England later that year for the Royal Palace designs (now at Windsor) were finished that year.

Having been adopted as his ward and heir by his uncle, Mr Bettenson, Rishton was sent abroad for two years from the beginning of 1771; Thomas Coke of Holkham met him in Turin during the winter of 1771-2 (Stirling, Coke of Norfolk, 1:101-3; 2:193)

Mr Roberts an English gentleman lately here [at Leghorn], wrongly asserts in his intended publication that the commerce at Leghorn was lately much diminished, owing to the English merchants undermining each other' (Brooke, Observations, 211).

George Robertson went 'at an early age' to Rome, and he was probably the 'Mr Robinson Landscape Painter' who arrived in Rome in January 1768.1 Robertson is next recorded in Italy in June 1769 when he joined an excursion of eighteen days from Rome through the Campagna to Ancona with his friend James Forrester and others. In November 1770 he was in Naples; he made a sketch from memory of a 'species of trumpet' in the museum at Portici for Dr Burney.2 Father Thorpe, who said of Robertson that he 'did not know a more valuable & at the same time a more modest young man in his profession', also mentioned him drawing in Rome Van Dyck's Maccabeus in March and one of the Altieri Claudes in April. By 20 April Robertson was about to depart with William Beckford of Somerley and a Mrs Buchanan for Russia.3 Their journey, however, ended in Hamburg, and by November they were in London.4 Robertson exhibited Italian views at the RA in 1772 and SA in 1773.





Hugh Robinson went to Rome in the hope of establishing himself as a history painter, but in the event he was only able to enjoy a limited success in portraiture. Between 1787 and 1792 'Robinson Inglese Protestante Pittore' (aged 35 in 1787) was living on the Corso 'verso Babuino' in the house of Conte Eroli.2 In 1793 he was listed as a history painter at the 'Piazza di Spagna, Villa di Londra' (Rome Lists). Early in 1790 he was working on a Cupid and Psyche, of which he had already completed a sketch, coloured 'most beautifully', said Edward Poore, 'tho' he cd not let it remain so without adding a red petticoat to the drapery, whitewash to the skin, and some clouds cutt out of whetstone'. The same letter referred to Robinson's 'admirable' drawings, his tracings made from drawings of the Parthenon frieze done on the spot and, finally, to his 'Melancholy Sensibility'.3  Robinson had completed the Cupid and Psyche by April 1791, by which time a number of commissions from the 4th Earl of Bristol had 'ended in smoke' and Robinson was receiving such 'very severe and acrimonious' criticisms from Mrs Hare-Naylor that he begged her not to 'honour him so highly with her attention'.4 His fortunes revived with the arrival of John Penn who commissioned works5 and bought 'three old pictures' from him.6 In 1792 Robinson turned more to portraiture, Lord Dalkeith noting in April/May that he was a 'history painter who occasionally draws portraits',7 and Robert Parker (in Rome November 1792 and March 1793) annotated Robinson's name in the list of English painters in Rome as 'very good portrait [painter]'. In April 1793 Sir William Forbes was less enthusiastic; having observed that Robinson (whom he called Robertson) was then 'much employed by British Travellers' as a portrait painter, and having seen 'some strong likenesses in his workroom', he nevertheless felt that it reflected badly on 'the state of Portrait painting in Rome to find him so much imployed, if we do not lay some part of his success to National partiality, for I am positive he would appear but a very second rate painter in London'.8 In December 1793 Sarah Bentham found five portraits in his studio of distinguished sitters: the Duchess of Devonshire, Lady Elizabeth Foster, Lord Bruce, Lord Dalkeith and Brownlow North9 (none of which is now known). A portrait of Princess Sophie Albertine of Sweden said to be signed T. Robinson Rome 179310 and a water-colour of the sculptor John Deare at Nero's Tomb (priv. coll.) by 'Robinson' are both probably by him.  In April 1794 Robinson signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus from English artists in Rome (Rome List 1794), but little more is heard of him until Fagan's sad letter to Cumberland, written at Ariccia on 16 October 1796: 'you certainly are informed of poor Robinson's death - from different uneasinesses the first of which was that affair with Mr Poor which prayed on his mind and possibly enclined rather in his constitution he got into a consumption of which having lingered about 6 months, he dyed on his passage to England - ... he certainly promised to be a very great portrait painter - and has done laterly some exceeding fine ones'.11
Mrs Robinson was in Naples by 21 November 1761.1 James Adam, who was in Naples between August and December that year, mentioned that Mrs Robinson, sister-in-law of the blue-stocking Elizabeth Montagu, held a small salon there which he called 'the cribbage club'.2
Metcalfe Robinson was in Rome by 6 December 1704, when, with Thomas Frankland and Samuel Tufnell, he met the Duke of Shrewsbury.1 He was probably the 'Sigr Rabeson' living near the Strada della Croce at Easter 1705.2 He was in Padua on 6 June 17053 with William Kerr and, again, Frankland and Tufnell. By 15 December 1705 Robinson was back in Rome describing it to his father 'the famousest place in the world and the first motive that induced me to become a traveller'.4  A 'Medcalf Robinson', possibly the same, was in Padua on 15 June 1732.5

Thomas Robinson ('Long Sir Thomas', as he became known), with his first wife Lady Lechmere and his sister Miss Robinson, had arrived in Turin by 28 October 1729. Lady Lechmere then wrote that her husband was 'much stronger and better than when we left England' and had been presented to the King of Sardinia; they were being well entertained by the British minister Edmund Allen.1 From Turin they went to Genoa and thence to Milan, where Lady Lechmere was ill (and where they were robbed in the night). On 28 December they were in Florence and by 26 January 1730 in Rome.2 On 31 March Robinson wrote from Naples to his father-in-law, the 3rd Earl of Carlisle, but they were back in Rome by 8 April (during the Papal election following the death of Benedict XIII on 21 February). They left on 7 May with the Hon. Benjamin Bathurst.3 On 30 May they were in Padua.4 In September they were in Spa [Spaw] and they passed nearly a year in Paris before returning to England in the autumn of 1731.  The bust of a 'Mr Robinson' by Filippo della Valle was probably of Thomas,5 and Lady Lechmere had sat in Rome to the French sculptor Bouchardon (Westminster Abbey) for a bust finished in January 1731.6

A 'glorious young fellow indeed and most amiable' (according to Horace Mann), Thomas Robinson spent some eighteen months in Italy, during which he took the opportunity to assess the leading portrait painters of the time. He was in Turin, apparently at the Academy, by August 1759, sharing lessons with his 'old acquaintance' John Mytton, and about to be joined by Thomas Wynn (see Baron Newborough) and James Grant of Castle Grant (18 Aug.).1 He left Turin on 12 November, accompanying Grant and Mytton to Milan, Florence, Rome and Naples (see Grant). In Rome, before May 1760 when Grant left, Robinson sat to Nathaniel Dance, with Grant, Mytton and Wynn, for a conversation piece (YCBA and Philadelphia MA). Robinson and Mytton stayed on in Rome after Grant's departure,2 and in July Robinson became the friend and guide of Benjamin West (who had arrived from America on 10 July). Robinson sat to him for an oil sketch (untraced) which West wanted to show Mengs as a sample of his capabilities; the sketch was hung in Daniel Crespin's house in Rome, where it was mistaken by Thomas Jenkins for a Mengs,3 an error facilitated by the fact that Robinson was also sitting to Mengs (though the portrait, now in Newby Hall, was not sent to England until September 1777).4  Robinson wrote to his father (9 Aug. 1760) explaining the differences between Mengs and Batoni, having seen a Hector and Andromache and a portrait of Pope Clement XIII by both artists.5 'Mr Minx is a German & can by no means degrade himself to ye Common Manner of thinking of ye Romans, whereas Battoni who is their Countryman obtains by that means a Preference ... He is besides of a very devout Exterior & Appearance'; in their portraits Batoni 'made one take Notice how well the Gold Lace was finished, how transparent the Linnen was, & complained of getting thro' so elaborate a performance. The likeness was indeed very perfect. Menx on the other hand ... dwelt on the Effect of his Whole Picture, on the Composition of it, its Force, & its Dignity, none of which things the Other with all his Accuracy had ever thought of'; as for the Hector and Andromache, 'Menx has drawn Hector, Andromache & Astyanax within the walls of Troy, while Battoni's is il Signore Ettore, la Signora Andromache & il fanciullo Astyanax on the Theatre in Haymarket'. Mengs also made for Robinson a design for a cameo (Oedipus at Colonus) which was executed by Pichler in 1788 (after Robinson's death),6 and Jenkins mentioned two ivory heads by Pozzi in Robinson's collection.7 In September 1760 Robinson was in Florence8 and his genial figure appears in Patch's Punch Party of 1760 (Dunham Massey). By 4 November 1760 he was in Venice where, of all the people he met, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu made the deepest impression, 'very old, very healthy, chearfull & clever, but scurrilous to the highest degree' (20 Nov.). Mytton was probably still in Venice in April 1761 and Robinson may have been with him. He was back in England by January 1762,9 and was to provide his fellow Yorkshireman William Weddell with an introduction to Jenkins three years later.

William Robinson travelled in Italy with his tutor, the celebrated Dr James Hay. They were in Padua on 1 December 17212 and again in March 1722 on their way to Rome.3 They left Rome on 15 February 1723,3 and on 22 May Stosch reported that they would soon be arriving back in London; Robinson had behaved in Rome as a 'bon homme sans conséquence et moitié imbécile', while Hay 'n'a fréquenté icy que les Adherents du Prétendant, et il a été meme recu fort familièrement dans son palais'.1

Monsu Robenson - 30' was living on the Piazza Mignanelli in Rome at Easter 1752 (with a 'Monsu Gian[?] Ingl. eret 24');1 he was doubtless the Robinson who had spent the summer in Rome, and was seen by James Russel's father in London in November.2


Robson went to Italy in 1787 with James Edwards, Robert Faulder and Peter Molini to examine the Pinelli library in Venice. His journal (Robson jnl.MSS) provides the itinerary and some commentary. At Mantua, Virgil's birthplace, 'we expected to feel as it were an Electrical Enthusiastical Shock on approaching the sacred turf once press'd by the favourite Poet of Antiquity; but, omnia mutantur since that distant period.' In Florence they saw the celebrations for the wedding of the Grand Duke's eldest daughter with the brother of the Elector of Saxony; these included a Cassino della Prato on 9 September (an open air festivity attended by three hundred coaches and some 50,000 people). He went on with Faulder for a two-day visit to Rome where they met 'Mr Jenkins the Banker' and bought drawings by Volpato and Grignion and some prints by Piranesi. On 24 September they travelled in Guy Head's carriage from Florence to Leghorn. There they saw pictures belonging to John Udny, British consul at Leghorn, and 'a Miserable Collection, & infamously arraigned [sic]' belonging to a Mr Scotto.


Probably also the 'Capt. Rucoche Inglese' in Rovigo on 12 June 1796, travelling to Venice (ASV is 778).
Roche (there is some doubt as to whether his christian name was Raymond or John) became a general in the King of Sardinia's service, attending the siege of Genoa in 1746. In 1748 he was governor of Savona during the unsuccessful French attack.1 He was said to have been in the service of the Sardinian crown 'from his most tender youth and for these fourty years past and upward' and, apart from some Jacobite tendencies, was 'a very good natured honest man and a very gallant gentleman'.2
Lord Rochford was briefly in Venice in March 1710 with one of his brothers and a Captain Gibbons, buying horses for his regiment of Dragoons, part of which was stationed near Milan (and part on Majorca).1 He left Turin in mid-April to meet James Stanhope in Genoa.2
Lord Rochford succeeded Arthur Villettes as British envoy to the King of Sardinia at Turin, where he arrived with his wife on 9 September 1749.1 'Lord and Lady Rochford's gaiety will be a great contrast to Villettes' solemnity' Horace Mann suggested, and Walpole told him that Lady Rochford was 'large, but very handsome, with great delicacy and address'.2 By January 1752 she was saying she was extremely tired of Turin, but, wrote Thomas Scrope, 'I rather think the people dislike her. She has for her cicisbeo an ensign of the Guards, who's pay and income may amount to about half-a-crown a day'.3  From 25 January to 17 June 1753, Rochford took leave in Italy.4 They were in Rome by 31 March, and on 14 April Lord Essex wrote that he had spent all the morning looking at antiquities with Lord Rochford, with whom he was sharing an antiquarian.5 Rochford was in Florence 17-24 May, going on to Bologna, Padua (10 June),6 and Venice. Mann entertained the Rochfords in Florence and was entranced by Lady Rochford's kindness; but 'alas', he later told Bubb Dodington, 'how few one meets like her!'7 Lady Louisa Stuart also thought her 'rather a remarkable person; a lady of free manners, who said and did whatever she pleased, but as her husband took no exceptions, and she was very clever and entertaining, she kept her place in general society'.8  On 26 March 1754 they left Turin to take leave in England. On 13 September they left St Osyth Priory in Essex, returning to Turin on 18 October.9 They finally took leave of the court at Turin on 30 January 1755 and set out for England on 11 February;10 they arrived on 28 February. Lord Rochford had brought back with him a cutting of poplar-pine (Lombardy poplar), the first to be planted in England.11

In August 1752 James Tyrrell told Ralph Howard that 'a sensible good natured Countryman of ours [i.e. an Irishman] Mr Rochfort' was in Florence.1 On 16 January 1753 James Russel listed a 'Mr Rochford' in Rome, probably the same.2 On 10 March 1753 'Robert Rochefort' was passing through Capua with Brinsley Butler, either going to or coming from Naples.3 (Lord Belvidere [whose wife was later in Italy on her own, see Belvidere] was to be Butler's father-in-law, but it would be curious if he had chosen to travel simply as Robert Rochfort in 1752).
Lord Rockingham travelled in Italy with a tutor E. Clarke ('a grandson of Lady Eyles').1 They were in Padua on 24 November 1733.2 In February 1734 they were in Verona, Rockingham complaining to Lord Essex, the British minister in Turin, that he had been ill and that his doctor had been questioned by General Schulenberg as to whether he 'had been clapt'.3 He was in Venice in June 1734, Pococke then saying he was 'ye only English Traveller' left there, but he would soon leave 'for Florence &c to spend the winter in Rome'.4 He sat to Rosalba Carriera in Venice that year, the portrait being finished in November (priv. coll.);5 a finished study was sold in 1996 (Christie's, 2 Jul.). Rockingham and Clarke arrived in Florence on 2 July, on their way to Rome and Naples.6




From late May 1759 to the summer of 1760 Rolfe was in Switzerland.1 On 31 August 1760 he came to Turin, presumably with Julia de Marino whom he had met in Lausanne and who was then carrying his son. On 5 September 1760 he went to Parma to see the marriage of the Princess Isabelle de Bourbon with Joseph, Archduke of Austria, returning after some fifteen days to Turin, where he spent the winter at the Academy. It was probably there that he acquired the 99 drawings by G.B. Borra, sold by his descendants (now YCBA). On 20 December Julia de Marino gave birth to his son at Villa Nuova, some fifty miles south of Turin. Her name does not recur in his journal, but Rolfe was observed in Milan in April 1761 (with Lord Gormanston and John Needham), still sighing over a lady he had left behind in Turin.2  He went on to Venice and Padua where he found 'the University formerly so famous, is now falling into decay, there are at present few or no foreigners, the only Students are poor People belonging to the Venetian State'. In June Rolfe enjoyed the opera at Parma 'generally one of the very best in Italy, as it is on the French Plan, all Burlesque dancing is excluded'. At Modena he found that a hundred of the best pictures had been sold to the King of Poland and were then at Dresden. But nowhere else did 'Pictures give so much pleasure as at Bologna, because they are nowhere so well preserved.' Rolfe alleged that more than 200 painters were working there, and he was impressed by the Academy of Sciences. On 5 July 1761 he reached Florence, but after a week went on to Siena where he passed seven weeks. On 1 September he returned to Leghorn, 'much the most considerable trading Town in the Mediteranean', 'excessivley clean well built' with some 40,000 inhabitants 'of which one third are foreigners'; every thing 'wears a Face of Business', in contrast to Pisa, his next stop, where the streets were deserted. From Lucca he returned to Florence where the antiquarian Bianchi (whose father had been Keeper of the Gallery) showed him round the Uffizi. He saw the 'drawings which were a doing for the Emperor, of everything that is in the Gallery; 12 men had been employed for these 12 years past, and it will take 30 more years to finish the design'. He went back to Siena for a week and arrived in Rome on 28 October 1761. While in Rome he sat for a portrait attributed to Batoni (priv. coll.)3 and he also contributed to a fund for Needham's academic expenses, see John Needham. On 15 December he had gone with Needham to Naples for six weeks, returning to Rome on 11 February 1762. In March he was planning to return home via Turin and Paris with Needham, probably to be accompanied part of the way by James Byres.4 By the spring of 1762 Rolfe was back in Norfolk.
A friend of Joseph Spence (who frequently refers to him in letters as 'The Captain'1), Rolle was in Italy with his cousin John Walter in 1752-3. On 12 November they were in Capua, going to or coming from Naples.2 At Easter 1753 they were lodged in the Casa Guarnieri in Rome.3 On 12 July they were in Mayence on their way home, Rolle then telling Spence they had visited Venice, Padua and Florence.4 Walter acquired (commissioned?) from Richard Wilson in Rome two landscapes, Rome from the Ponte Molle (dated 1754; NMW) and Diana and Actaeon (priv. coll.).5
Samuel Rolle was in Italy with his tutor Walter Bowman. They were in Padua in August 1724,1 and enrolled at the University on 7 September.2 By 25 November they were in Rome, where Stosch said Rolle was 'holding firm' though he had been introduced to Jacobites in December.3 On 10 January 1725 they left Rome with Sir James Nasmyth and Patrick Wood for Naples to hear the opera. They all returned to Rome on 2 February, having come on foot from Ostia with Sir Thomas Peyton and his tutor, in order to see the ceremony of the Festival of the Purification 'and receive the blessed candle'.4 Rolle and Bowman left Rome on 24 February,5 and were in Florence by 9 March, but Rolle was unable to meet the Grand Duke since he had no mourning dress with him, the Court being then in mourning for the King of Spain.6 Bowman's name appears on the Padua University register in September 1726 and September 1727, indicating that he may have stayed in Italy after Rolle had departed.7
Romney was already well-established as a portrait painter in London by the time he travelled to Italy with Ozias Humphry. They experienced difficulties in Nice (their first attempt to sail direct to Leghorn was foiled by the weather), but eventually reached Genoa, where Romney described collections in the Doria, Durazzo and Balbi palaces.1 From Genoa they had a stormy journey by sea to Leghorn; they took a hasty view of Florence and arrived in Rome on 18 June 1773.2 Romney and Humphry then went their different ways, Romney applying himself closely to the study of old masters and the antique during his nineteen months in the city. He stayed at the Jesuits College.3  It is said Romney carried a letter to the Pope from the Duke of Gloucester,4 which obtained for him the privilege of having a scaffold raised in the Vatican stanze. He made many studies from Raphael, including a full-size copy 'in umber and oil' of the lower part of Raphael's Transfiguration, then in S.Pietro in Montorio; Father Thorpe said the copy was begun by 16 November 1774 and it was apparently finished by 4 January 1775.5 The 2nd Earl of Warwick (formerly Earl Brooke) had requested first refusal of the copies Romney made in Italy and Romney was also to look for old masters to buy for his patron - but he seems to have bought little.6 Of original compositions, Romney painted a Providence brooding over chaos [also called Jupiter Pluvius] and a Wood Nymph (engraved by Valentine Green in 1778), and he sent a head of Sappho to Richard Cumberland some time in 1774 (it was acknowledged in August). Romney met Fuseli in Rome and, under his influence, made a number of drawings for illustrations to Milton, Gray and Shakespeare; these are difficult to date, but some at least appear to have been made in Rome.7 Father Thorpe wrote that Romney's 'works here [in Rome] have been cold and feeble like himself',8 - a curiously uncharitable comment on his introverted character. A portrait of Thomas, 7th Viscount Bulkeley, painted in Rome in 1773, has been attributed to Romney.  It appears that Romney stayed in Rome until January 1775, although in August 1774 Charles Greville in England was writing to William Hamilton in Naples to introduce Romney 'when he went there',9 but there is no further evidence for a visit to Naples. Romney left Rome on 10 January 1775 and Humphry arranged for his things to be sent back to England from Rome by Thomas Jenkins. Romney spent three weeks in Florence, where on 16 January Thomas Patch introduced him at the Uffizi.10 One of the pictures he then wished to copy was Titian's Venus, but none of his chosen subjects could be taken off the wall, despite the attentions of Lord Cowper and Horace Mann. Romney meanwhile admired Cimabue and Masaccio (almost certainly under the influence of Patch). He left Florence with John Udny, who attended him during a brief illness in Bologna where they stayed nearly two weeks. Udny 'who knew all the good collections' then went on with Romney through Ferrara to Venice, where they arrived on 25 February.  Romney intended to stay there about a month; he painted a portrait of Edward Wortley Montagu (and acquired his way of making Turkish coffee), and studied Titian. He was to copy his John the Baptist, but Joseph Wright said later that he didn't because of an unexplained 'disaster'; instead Romney 'painted a half-length of Montagu and two or three heads which he will finish in England'.11 Though he found many of Titian's works 'very dark and much damaged', Romney became sure that 'a just idea of Titian can never be formed out of Venice'. He next spent two or three weeks in Parma, where Matthew William Peters had looked forward to meeting him at the end of April; he apparently only copied a Magdalen's head from a Correggio, because 'the picture answered not his expectation'.11 Romney left Italy through Turin and Mont Cenis, and he was back in London on 1 July 1775.  Two of Romney's Italian sketchbooks, one containing notes on his journeys survive (YCBA).
On 13 February 1794 Colonel Rooke and a Mr Hill dined with Mrs Bentham in Rome.1 He was presumably also the Colonel Rooke in Pisa in January 1795,2 and the 'Col. Rouke' / 'Col. Enrico Rucchi' / 'Enrico Rohe Inglese' in Verona and Padua in May 1796.3

Joseph Rose came to Rome in 1769,1 and in June he joined James Forrester, Nollekens, George Robertson and others on an eighteen-day expedition into the Roman campagna (see Forrester). In 1770 Rose exhibited the model of a bas-relief at the RA, giving his address as Rome, and he was probably the 'Monsu Rosa' lodging in Rome 'del lato del Quartiere' in the parish of S.Andrea delle Fratte at Easter 1770.2 A drawing by Piranesi inscribed Bought of Piranesi in Rome, March 1770 by Joseph Rose was sold in 1989 (Christie's, 4 Jul.). 'Gioseppe Rose' arrived in Venice on 21 May 1770.3
By 7 April 1729 he had left Rome with Lord Lovelace for Leghorn, intending to return home via Hanover (SP 85/16, f.522).

Lord Rosebery passed through Florence in the autumn of 1756, when Horace Mann gave him a letter of introduction to Cardinal Albani in Rome.1 Rosebery arrived in Rome on 16 October 1756, but apparently left almost immediately for Naples.2 On 24 November George Lucy recounted meeting him in Rome, Rosebery explaining how invalids in Naples generally stayed three or four miles out of the city 'where the air is still more impregnated with sulphur'.3 Robert Adam, then in Rome, had already told his sisters of 'little Rosebery and his whore' who was shortly to 'bring furth', but by 26 November he was writing that 'with little Rosebery I am hand in gloves and sat with him two hours this evening. He consults me about everything as well as his clothes as in his virtu'. On 30 November 1756 Rosebery gave an entertainment with Lord Elgin for English and Scottish friends in Rome, Robert Adam being amongst those who got 'beastly drunk' in a 'sea of liquor'.4 He was presumably the 'Milord Carlo Risberi' listed in Venice in April and May 1757 (with 'Giorgio Cupper' [George Cooper]).5 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu saw him there in April 1757: 'no bad Figure, But I am sorry for him. He is as Ridiculous as a Man that would carry Oysters to Colchester'. Later he breakfasted with her in Padua: 'he seem'd delighted with my House and Gardens, and perhaps has forgot he ever saw me or any thing that belong'd to me'.6 Rosebery returned to London on 2 October 1757.7
Giorgio Rosu - Scozzese - 22' was living in the Strada Felice in Rome at Easter 1713.1 At Easter 1720 'Giorgio Rosee - Inglese - Pittore' was living by the Piazza di Spagna.2 These references may both refer to the Scottish portrait painter George Ross, otherwise known only for a portrait of Colonel John Somerville (listed at Hopetoun in 1733) of c.1710.3 The name of 'Geo:Ross', with that of Henry March and the year 1719, was carved at the entrance to the Catacombs in the church of S.Gennaro.4
The Ross brothers were in Italy with a tutor, Craigie. On 30 July 1739 Lord Ross was told by his bankers in London, 'When your Lordship knows where your Sons [sic] are to Stay any time in their way or in Italy, so as I can tell where to Direct for Mr Craigie I could send him creditt directly on Genoa or Leghorn'. On 1 November 1739 it was confirmed that 'Your Son Mr Ross' had drawn £80 at Genoa (Coutts ledgers, 21:120, 153).

A native of Rosshire, Ross had come to France as a boy and served in the French army which he left without a commission; after seeking 'employment among the troups of those princes who are in peace with his Britanique majesty', he came to Italy to seek advice from travellers as to whether he might now return home. Sir Richard Lyttelton and the Abbé Grant urged him to, the former helping him financially, the latter providing recommendations (Seafield MSS, GD 248/99/3; Abbé Grant, 18 Feb. 1762).



In 1785 Rossi won the Royal Academy Travelling Studentship and went to Rome for three years. At Easter 1786 'Carlo Rossi da Londra Scultore - 20' was living on the Corso 'verso Babuino, casa di Canobi'.1 He submitted a marble relief from Rome for exhibition at the RA but the Council considered that 'his time would be more properly employed in modelling than in working in marble'. In 1787 he showed a Temptation of Ulysses at the RA, giving his address as Rome, and (also apparently at Rome) he made a marble statue of Mercury for the 6th Baron King (Peter King); in 1789 he gave a London address in the RA exhibition catalogue (DBS). Colonel John Campbell is said to have employed him in Rome.
In the year 1769, one Rossiter, a young Irishman, came to Leghorn in search of adventure, with no other recommendation than the deportment of a gentleman, added to a fine figure and countenance'; he lived with an Italian lady of considerable fortune who bought him a commission in the Tuscan army, but subsequently robbed and murdered her; he was condemned to the galleys for life.1 Brooke, writing in 1794, described the trial of 'Captain Roseter' (after which he wore the yellow slave's dress, a murderer's uniform) and said it took place 'some years since'.2
Rouby [or Ruby] was in Rome by 1776 and he stayed in Italy until his death thirty-six years later. Although described as a history painter, his work is known only through some portraits and carefully drawn copies of old masters. By 1776, when Thomas Jones first encountered him at the English Coffee House,1 Rouby had made a copy of Guido Reni's Aurora for the Duke of Dorset.2 By 1779 he had painted the portrait of James Byres's father Patrick (which was sent back to Scotland in 1790 and is now untraced).3 At Easter 1777 'Giovanni Ruby Pittore Inglese eretico 25' was living in the same house as Henry Fuseli in the Strada Felice,4 and in 1779 and 1787 (when his age was given as thirty-five) the English Catholic painter 'Gio.Giacomo Rouby' was living in the Via Babuino, in the same house as one 'Sigra Ma Rosa Mazzotti' (who by 1787 had two small children (aged two and four).5  Rosa was very probably the 'little Roman Gipsey' who had performed on the horizontal wheel in the Borghese Gardens and so enchanted Rouby that he changed his religion and married her.6 Mrs Thomas Banks told Humphry that she was 'the youngest of those girls where Hardwick [Thomas, the architect] lives' and that Rouby had taken '[William] Miller's house as was'.7 Jones said that Rouby's conversion and marriage had been made 'with the Consent & Approbation of his Patron Mr Hackaert'6 - presumably Philipp Hackert, the German landscape painter, with whom Rouby was on a sketching expedition to the Grotto of Aegeria in October 1779,6 and who in September 1783 was to introduce Rouby to Allan Ramsay in Rome.8 It was also through his association with Hackert that Rouby met Goethe (presumably in 1787) who, however, considered the young Englishman an ass ('somaro').9  In 1779 Rouby was advertising in Rome as a history painter ('Ruby over Luigi Aliberti/History'),10 though none of his histories survives. In September 1783 he showed Ramsay a portrait of Hackert's brother, 'which was very like, and also a copy of the famous picture of Cenci [the so-called Beatrice Cenci] in the Colonna done with Indian ink so dextrously that it seemed done with Black chalk,' and the next day produced 'a portfolio of his academic figures which are very clever.'8 Rouby acquired a reputation for these copies (and he was possibly the 'Mr Pang' [? the name seems illegible] 'an English Student' making 'some Chiaroscuros for Mr Stawell' in July 1783.8 Between 1785 and 1790 Sir Richard Colt Hoare acquired a number of such studies in bistre (Stourhead); Hoare had others from J.C. Seydelmann of Dresden, whose style Rouby had so successfully adopted that he became 'in some instances his superior, by giving in a more forcible manner, the style of the master whose works he copied'.11 In November 1789 Rouby was in Florence, copying Cignani, Leonardo and Rosso in the Uffizi,12 and on 14 September 1790 he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno in Florence.13 From at least July to December 1791 he was in Naples with his wife.14  In 1792 Rouby met Lord Bruce for whom he undertook a number of commissions. Some drawings had been sent to Lord Ailesbury (Lord Bruce's father) by November 1792, apparently the copies from Schidone which Thomas Brand mentioned to Ailesbury in January 1793: 'being both drawn looking the same way is to be sure an objection to their being formal companions, but I hope you think the execution good.'15 There was a portrait of an officer with Vesuvius in the background by Rouby at Attingham dated 1792 (Christie's, 22 Jul. 1938) and a letter from Rouby to Lady Bruce, dated Rome, 17 March 1797,16 mentioned further commissions: 'Heads from the Antique done for His Lordship', copies of 'The St Sebastian at the Capitol and the Magdalen in the Colonna Gallery' finished 'some time ago' (the former 'considerable larger than usual' and 'one of my Finest Drawings'); Rouby 'did not recollect' another commission for a copy from the 'Monte Capitol'; Lady Bruce had made up for the loss of a commission at Bologna by ordering two other drawings, a copy of Guercino's Night 'of the large Size', and a head from Raphael's Heliodorus; Patrick Moir had given him another commission from Lord Bruce, to make a drawing of Titian's Danae in Naples. The same letter also reveals that Rouby had been working for the 4th Earl of Bristol, 'at St Gregory's in the Chapel [oratory] of St Sylvia' (presumably copying the frescoes by Guido Reni), though the damp and cold prevented progress during the winter. (A copy of The Golden Age by A.J. Carstens with figures by Rouby, is in the Thorvaldsen Museum). Rouby had been listed in Rome in 1793 as a portrait painter, still living on the Via Babuino, 'over the Argentiere' (Rome List) and in April 1794 he had signed (as John James Ruby) the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus from English artists in Rome (Rome List 1794). Little is known of his final years, but in 1799 he was again copying in the Uffizi in April and August (the Fornarina).17 He died in Rome on 21 August 1812.18

The Scottish antiquarian William Rouet was three times in Italy. On the first occasion he accompanied John Maxwell. From December 1741 to February 1742 they had been in Geneva. By November 1742 they were in Naples, having stayed 'a month or two' in Viterbo and travelled through Tuscany with four others (Williamson and his tutor, Edward Sainthill and Thomas Cholwick); they had spent only a short time in Rome.1 Maxwell, Rouet, Sainthill and Cholwick left Mantua on 28 May for Verona, but were detained at the lazzaretto at the Veronese-Mantuan border until 12 June.2 At Easter 1748 'Gugliemo Ruet' was living on the Piazza di Spagna in Rome with James Murray, Peter Crommelin and Henry Knight.3 In April 1748 'two Scotch Gentlemen Mr Ruati and Dr Hope' came to Rome from Naples where they had studied the antiquities at Herculaneum, 'Ruati' having purchased some rarities.4 That this was the same William Rouet seems confirmed by a letter which Daniel Crespin wrote from Rome on 11 March 1763: Rouet, he said, had then found 'a great alteration for the worse over the Face of the Campania of Rome, and more misery ... within the walls, than he observed fifteen years ago'.5  In 1760 Rouet had resigned his appointment at Glasgow University to accompany Charles, Lord Hope, and his brother James Hope in Italy.6 The Abbé Grant, who had met Rouet in Rome with the Hope brothers, wrote on 12 September 1763 that he was 'a most valuable man' with whom he had 'been these 20 years in close correspondence'.7 Some travel journals in Edinburgh (NLS 4990-1), probably from the early 1740s and covering France and Italy, have been attributed to William Rouet.



Rousseau was a merchant banker in Venice, to whose servant payments were made in August 1714 by Thomas Coke.1 Between 1716 and 1724 he was in partnership with Claude Jamineau and in 1728 he was in business on his own. He may have been the Philip Rousseau in Padua on 4 May 1700,2 and the 'Mr Russeau', English merchant in Venice whom Pococke saw in August 1737.3
His itinerary is partly recorded in T.C. Porter's journals. They met in Siena in August 1788 and March 1789, and travelled together from Rome to Naples in November 1788 (Porter MSS).

A young Gentleman of great Learning and Virtue; knows all the Antient Languages thoroughly, and speaks most of the Modern',1 Lord Roxburghe was in Italy 1701-2. He was first mentioned in Rome on 19 December 1701 with Alexander Wedderburn, and on the 22nd they invited Robert Sharpe to accompany them to Naples (though he did not apparently accept).2 The Duke of Shrewsbury met Roxburghe in Rome on 28 February and 28 March 1702.3 Roxburghe was in Padua on 1 May 1702, and Wedderburn eight days later.4
On 4 November 1760 the young Duke of Roxburghe was among the 'concourse of people of fashion' in Venice.1 On 12 August 1761 Dutens in Turin was sending Roxburghe his compliments, assuming he had by then reached Florence.2 Roxburghe had delivered the third and fourth volumes of Tristram Shandy to Horace Mann in Florence by 1 August 1761.3 There his cherubic face appealed to Patch who painted him three times: a full-length caricature (NPG), with Tabitha Mendes (priv. coll.), and in The Punch Party of 1761 (Chatsworth), in which there also appears on the wall a caricature of Roxburghe (shown as a monkey) proposing to Miss Mendes; it was alleged that he had intended proposing to her, but was dissuaded by her ugliness.4 He had left Florence for Rome and Naples by 21 November,5 bearing an introduction from Mann for himself and 'his friend Mr Smith a Scotch gentleman' (dated 8 November).6  On 1 December he delivered a letter from Mann to Sir James Gray in Naples.7 He was back in Rome by 13 February 1762, when Cardinal Albani acknowledged Mann's letter of introduction.6 In March he visited the Vatican Library with the 3rd Duke of Grafton, Lord Tavistock and Richard Lyttelton, testing John Needham's theory concerning the origin of Egyptian characters.8 They all signed an attestation on Needham's behalf on 25 March 1762 which was forwarded to the Society of Antiquaries (this letter was also signed by 'R. Smith').9 'Sig.Duca Roxborroe' and 'Monsieur Smitt Magr. Domo' were staying near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1762; the Duke was noticed in Rome on 31 March,10 and was said to be staying until May.8 It was probably at this time that Winckelmann acted as his cicerone and described him as more stupid than a young girl11 (an extraordinary judgment on a man whose library and antiquarian interests were to be commemorated by the founding of The Roxburghe Club in 1812). In Rome Roxburghe also sat to Batoni (Floors Castle; Clark/Bowron 239); although the portrait is dated 1761 it must have been painted principally in 1762 according to his itinerary. On 5 May Roxburghe and Smith were in Venice,12 and on 16 June Roxburghe and 'Haeber Smith' left Venice.13


Rumbold, who had been charged with misconduct in India, went abroad after his acquittal, 'to let things cool a little, and for his son's health'.1 He was in Naples in April 1786 with his second wife and sick son William. Lady Rumbold and a Miss Rumbold were noticed in Rome sometime before 1 April 1786.2 Emma (later Lady Hamilton) wrote on 30 April that the son was 'dying of a decline' and could not 'walk from bed to the chair; and Lady Rumbold, like a tender-hearted wretch, is gone to Rome, to pass her time there with the English, and as took the coach and all the English servants with her, and left poor Sir Thomas, with is heart broken, waiting on the sick son. You can't think what a worthy man he is ... [he] likes me very much, and every day as brought is carriage or phaeton ... and carries me and mother and Sir William out'.3 Earlier in March Rumbold was asking Sir William Hamilton's permission to export a horse from Naples.4 In June the son sailed home to England and his parents travelled overland, having 'no hopes of finding him alive'1 (he died on 14 June). In July Sir Thomas wrote from England telling Emma he intended returning to Naples in October.5

Count Rumford was an occasional member of the Palmerstons' entourage in Italy in 1793-4 when he became an admirer of Lady Palmerston. 'Going from you is so like going from home that it makes me feel quite lonesome and melancholy', he once wrote to her,1 while in return she thought him 'particularily agreeable and a wonderful pleasant addition to our Society. He draws well ... and has a thousand resources'. Lady Webster (also in Milan that summer) enjoyed his company less, finding his post-prandial 'discourse ... upon politics, happiness, morality, etc. very tedious indeed'.2 Rumford accompanied the Palmerstons on expeditions from Milan to Como and stayed on at Verona before joining them in Switzerland in August 1793. In December Rumford was in Pisa (warming to Lady Charlotte Bolingbroke), before rejoining the Palmerstons in Naples. He stayed with them, and on one expedition was nearly killed by an eruption on Vesuvius. Count Rumford was in Munich by 22 June 1794, awaiting to welcome the Palmerstons.
The brothers Alexander and John Runciman went to Italy in 1767, taking an opportunity offered by the contract to paint the saloon of Penicuik for Sir James Clerk. The banker Robert Alexander also contributed to their support while they were abroad. Alexander Runciman reached Rome in June 1767, intending to study landscape during a stay of two and a half years, and John joined him later, probably in September.1 They were lodged in the 'casa sul cantone della Piazza della SSma.Trinita de' Monti' during 1768 (they paid for accommodation up to 15 December)2 and both were listed in the Strada Gregoriana in 1769, at the same address as Anne Forbes and her mother,3 even though John had died in Naples during the winter of 1768-9.  John's few surviving Italian works include a remarkable Self-portrait which shows him reflecting on Michelangelo's figure of Day (SNPG); some of his drawings and an etching likewise show a precocious interest in Michelangelo. John's originality seems to have aroused some jealousy, and differences between him and James Nevay had given rise to 'a scene of Villany'.4 But by November 1768 he was 'advanced in a consumption', and Andrew Lumisden thought him 'past recovery'.5 He left Rome for Naples where he died, having destroyed much of his work ('his better things').6 On receiving the news of his brother's illness, Alexander had travelled to Naples with James Barry, only to find John already buried.7  John's death, and no doubt Barry's encouragement, prompted Alexander to be more open about his own ambitions as a history painter. Already in December 1767 he had written that 'I have been [on] a wrong plan of study for painting all my life'.8 'Serious history [painting] is not to be learn'd but with great patience & assiduity', he wrote in September 1769: 'I'm here burried amongst Old Statues &c & very shortly I'll leave them for a while to go upon Titian for six Months after that I'll to the Antique again the divels in it if that plan of Education follow'd with care dont produce somthing'.4 He embarked on a large painting of Ulysses and Nausicaa with nine figures, the principal ones being slightly larger than life (RA 1772; untraced). It was said to have been painted for admission to the Accademia di S.Luca in Rome and Runciman had sought Mengs's criticism (which was unfavourable).9 Runciman then changed his plans for the decoration at Penicuik, from fairly generalised landscapes with classical themes (as recorded in a drawing in the Penicuik papers), to a heroic series of the life of Achilles.10 This was openly inspired by Gavin Hamilton's Homeric pictures and Villa Borghese decorations (first mentioned as early as 1770) and by the sight of a painted room in the Baths of Titus 'far underground', which Runciman examined by torch light; 'I could not make a drawing of it but the Thought was enough for me ... the story was the Council of ye Gods on the Fate of Troy'.10 After Barry's departure in April 1770, Runciman's circle included Henry Fuseli, John Brown and J.T. Sergel. His work from his last two years in Rome includes a series of drawings for his Achilles project of which the most important is the immensely elaborate Marriage of Peleus and Thetis (apparently referred to in a letter of 1771 to Sir James). This and the drawing of Achilles and Pallas (apparently mentioned in his letter of May 1770), may be the earliest dateable examples of the use of outline as a consciously primitive form (both SNG). He also produced such original works as his first drawing of Ossian Singing in a much freer and more spontaneous style (SNG). Such a drawing, or the painting of the Origin of Painting (1773; Penicuik), support Fuseli's generous assertion that Runciman was 'the best painter among us here in Rome'.11

An excellent good master in every branch of musick' he was giving lessons to Lady Stanhope in Naples in April 1762, by which time his compositions were admired in Naples and Rome. In November he was about to return home and the Abbé Grant recommended him as being of excellent family, a master of most instruments and particularly the harpsichord (Seafield MSS, GD 248/99/3; 17 Apr., 27 Nov. 1762).
Sir John Rushout was in Italy with his nephew Samuel Sandys. They were in Naples on 12 March 1720 when consul John Fleetwood reported they would not leave for Rome 'these 6 days'.1 Sandys and another unnamed traveller, doubtless Rushout, were lodged near the Piazza di Spagna at Easter 1720.2 On 10 May consul John Fuller forwarded a letter for Rushout from Leghorn to Venice,3 and on 23 May Rushout and Sandys were in Padua.4
John Rushout arrived in Lucca on 10 September 1759 with a Mr Williams.1 On 10 February 1760 he was 'daily expected' in Rome from Naples with Jacob Houblon.2 He appears in Patch's Punch Party painted in Florence in 1760 (Dunham Massey).  These dates broadly agree with those in an anonymous (and apparently incomplete) Italian travel journal (NLW), thought to be by a member of the Rushout family, and almost certainly by John.3 Clearly written retrospectively, it is essentially a collection of historical notes, copious Latin quotations and instructions on travel, but it furnishes the itinerary given above. Statistics are mixed up with comments on, for example, the incomprehensible Italian accent in Turin, the excellence of the opera at Lucca, and the great profits made by the Grand Duke of Tuscany from the free port of Leghorn. Rome prompted harsh reflections on Catholicism, which encouraged the populace to be 'so concerned with their souls, that they neglect their bodies'.
Toward the end of his life Rushout recalled that 'I had myself the good fortune to commence my travels in foreign lands at an early period of my life, and it was in the year 1792 [sic] that I first saw Rome, where I sojourned during the greater part of eight successive years'.1 He was then already a dedicated antiquarian and when he met J.B.S. Morritt in Naples in 1795 the latter commented that they 'were both medallising' but in a 'very different way, as [Rushout's] collection is upwards of twelve thousand, and he gives up his whole time to it from morning to night'.2 The Rushout Voyage MSS gives a detailed list of places visited with only the slightest commentary. He had spent nearly a year in Spain before arriving in Genoa in September 1793. Lord Tyrone and a Mr Talbot accompanied him on a tour of Piedmont in October and on 30 November he was in Rome writing to Bodoni in Parma concerning the purchase of the works of Horace and Trevor's Britannia.3 In 1794 he sat to Angelica Kauffman in Rome (Christie's, 25 Jun. 1965) and he met Sarah Bentham there in February that year.4 Between May and October he travelled in Germany and Switzerland. Morritt met him in Naples in December 1795 and on 29 March 1797 he was travelling in a Mr Brummel's carriage from Naples to Terracina. In August 1797 William Artaud at Rome alluded to 'all the Eulogiums which Mr Rushout' was then bestowing on Camuccini's drawings from Raphael.5 On 22 December 1798 there is the brief comment in the Voyage MSS, 'fled from thence [Naples] to Palermo with the King' and, during the continuing disturbances in Naples attendant on the French invasion, Rushout experienced an enforced residence on the island of Procida. He remained in Italy until at least January 1800, when his Voyage de Catalogue ends abruptly at Rome. It was probably in 1800 that Rushout acted as cicerone in Rome to Lord Montgomerie and Pryse Gordon (see Gordon). But there are few details concerning Rushout's protracted stay. Later he observed that in Italy he had become 'impressed with a profound veneration - which during the course of a long life has never since been erased from my memory - for the stupendous monuments of falling greatness, with which it is on all sides surrounded - an unbounded admiration for the works of the most refined art in painting, sculpture, and architecture, with which it then abounded, and to which I had the advantage of a most free and unlimited access'.1
James Russel came of a clever family, his father being a schoolmaster at Westminster, one of his brothers becoming a doctor and another a bookseller. Soon after leaving Westminster, Russel went to Italy to study painting but, as with other not exceptionally gifted young artists, he became instead an antiquary. The shift of interest is evident in his anonymous Letters from a Young Painter abroad to his friends in England (whose authorship was only generally recognised this century), which cover his first ten years in Rome, to 10 November 1749. The first volume was published in 1748 and revised, with a second volume, in 1750. Apart from their antiquarian content, the letters (which are addressed to members of his family) contain a wealth of information concerning Italian life and customs. They are supplemented by an extensive correspondence between Russel and his father (Add. 41169; the dates of these letters cited in brackets). Russel sailed from Marseilles to Leghorn and arrived in Rome on 24 January 1740, taking up lodgings in the Strada Felice. Subsequently he resided in the Via Margutta between 1745 and 1751 (his age given as 32 in 1745, and 38 in 1751), in the Via Babuino 1753-5, and in the Strada Paolina in 1760-1 ('Giacomo Roselli Pittore Inglese').1 He had brought with him an introduction from Dr Mead to the painter Camillo Paderni but, 'finding him a younger man, and in a less settled condition than I imagined', Russel enrolled instead on 22 February as a pupil of Francesco Imperiali (Paderni's master, who died in November that year; it is not clear who was Russel's master thereafter). Russel's achievements as an artist were limited, but not through lack of application. In April 1742 he was 'plodding on, now and then a little brisker than ordinary, like an ass, when plentifully fed', and in October 1742 he 'owned [himself] ambitious of painting'. In the summer of 1744 he met the 'sprightly' William Drake (1723-96, of Shardeloes), for whom he painted a conversation-piece showing his patron with Edward Holdsworth, the Rev. Thomas Townson and probably James Dawkins, with himself in the background. It was not a total success, being described as 'a small unfinished sketch', and the head of Townson 'never was perhaps a striking likeness'.2 It remains Russel's only known oil painting, although A Group of Englishmen at Rome (YCBA) has (rather unconvincingly) been attributed to him, as also a Poussinesque landscape, signed JR 1756 (London art market 1956); three of his water-colours belonged to Iolo Williams in 1951.  In August 1745 Russel confessed that accompanying intelligent travellers was preventing him from practising his art, but allowed him 'a freer access to the finest pictures'. Drake had given him some commissions for copies which he was working on in 1748 in the Borghese Palace; in 1750 he had finished a Domenichino (13 Oct. 1750). The following year he twice described how he was generally occupied from morning till dinner-time in copying some celebrated picture and attending the Academy after dinner. In November 1749 he had described to his doctor brother 'a historico-allegorical piece' he was working on, showing 'the superiority of Pharmacy, and the despicable situation of Physic', but in the same letter he also observed that where Nature has been 'more sparing in bestowing parts and genius, it is absolutely necessary, in order to supplie that deficiency, to make use of an indefatigable industry and diligence'. Such self-awareness may have been induced by the increasing presence of British artists in Rome; there had been a dozen in 1747 (9 Dec. 1747), but by November 1749 there were sixteen, who had formed themselves into an Academy (of which Russel was a part). In December 1753 Russel began a copy of the Aldobrandini Marriage for Ralph Howard,3 but by then painting was taking second place to his antiquarian pursuits. Drawings he was making for Drake were of unpublished marbles, and those he eventually sent to Rowland Holt and Marsh in 1753 were of statues (13 Oct. 1750, 31 Jul. 1753).  Russel had first received British travellers in Rome in 1740. In September 1741 he recalled meeting several who had recently been in Rome: 'lords M[ansell] and Q[uarendon] Sir R. N[ewdigate] Mr D[ashwood]. and Mr Castleton; the last of whom generously took me with him to Naples, in company with the E. of L[incoln]'. Thereafter he was again in Naples in June 1742 with Christopher Fortescue. On 5 May 1745 he left Rome for Venice with John Bouverie, James Dawkins and Richard Phelps, travellers anxious 'to improve themselves'. Russel then appears to have spent a year in Florence, from July 1745 to October 1746. In February 1749 he wrote that 'for above two years I have been a great rambler, and have changed my quarters as often as a Tartar'; in May 1749 he was in Naples (14 Jun. 1749). Russel was soon expressing concern at how ill-informed and easily distracted British travellers were. He criticised at length Stephen Whatley's anonymous and anti-clerical Short Account of a late Journey to Tuscany [1741], and said that books on modern curiosities 'are full of mistakes'; by 1746 he intended to 'to bring within the compass of a pocket volume' a revised companion for the traveller. Already by October 1742 his letters had revealed a serious antiquarianism, with their copies of inscriptions and liberal classical quotation. Russel was deeply interested in the excavations at Herculaneum, 'concerning which I have frequently discoursed with gentlemen', and he wrote careful descriptions of them, including a transcript of Marcello de Venuti's diary of the 1739 excavations. In the Preface to the first volume of his Letters Russel explained that his accounts of Herculaneum were 'much more extensive, particular, and exact, than any that has before appeared' and had provided the 'first occasion to the thought of making any of these Letters public'. The two volumes published in 1750 also contain letters devoted to careful descriptions of the Capitol, the Tarpeian Rock and the Obelisk found in Rome, as well as accounts of Vesuvius and the cities of Florence and Bologna. One letter reprints an account by Russel's friend Ridolfino Venuti, the Pope's antiquary, of a cameo bought by Horatio Walpole.  When Russel first came to Rome Mark Parker was the best-known antiquary for British travellers and when Parker was banished in 1749 Russel seemed set to succeed, but his Jacobite sympathies prevented a smooth succession. Russel had respectfully described the exiled Stuarts in December 1741 and had written piously and at length in May 1745 and June 1747 concerning Clementina Sobieska's funeral (which had occurred in 1735), her tomb in St Peter's and her monument in SS. Apostoli: these he illustrated in two plates (dedicated to Rowland Holt and John Monro) in the second volume of the Letters. Russel's father had asked for portraits of the Pretender and of his son Henry Benedict (14 Jun., 29 Jul. 1749), and both Russels greatly admired Edward Holdsworth (whom Russel had painted in 1744), a Non-juror identified as a dangerous Jacobite. It is not altogether surprising that Russel was already mentioning 'deceitful friends' in October 1743.  On 30 August 1750 his father wrote from London to say he had heard that his son was to succeed Mark Parker. On 14 June 1752 Russel told his father at some length of his difficulties, which all seemed to stem from John Parker and a scalding kettle. When 'a certain person' [Mark Parker] was removed 'from this place, it was suggested to me that I shou'd make a trial of a post in which it was very probable I shou'd succeed'. Russel duly guided 'amongst others the Lords Cavendish' [Frederick and George Augustus in the summer of 1750] but their tutor Robert Lowth 'unluckily let fall a boiling tea-kettle of water upon one of my legs; which accident laid me up for six weeks' while others supplanted him, 'particularly one [John Parker - as is made clear from his father's reply dated 9 July 1752], who, to maintain himself, abus'd me plentifully by representing me as a person dangerous as to my principles'. John Parker's report was soon spread in Florence and Turin 'through which places all Englishmen pass on their way to Italy'. Meanwhile Lord Pulteney and Henry Seymour had given him encouragement [probably early in 1751] and in June 1752 he was attending Lord Bruce, Sir Thomas Kennedy, Lascelles Iremonger, Benjamin Lethieullier and Thomas Scrope in the Campagna; Russel had also been asked by one of them to make a plan and drawings.  It is difficult to be certain of Russel's hardships; John Parker could clearly bring out the worst in anybody. But already by September 1749 Russel had been in business as an antiquary/dealer. He executed a commission received from John Quick in England on 30 June, sending him from Rome statues, busts, prints, maps and pastes in September.4 Between March 1752 and December 1753 (at least) he was acting as agent in Rome for Ralph Howard to whom he mentioned (25 Dec. 1753) his 'continual occupation as Antiquarian' (see Ralph Howard).  Russel's last ten years are less well documented. 'Young Russel, the painter' was acting as cicerone to a Mr Fitzhugh and William Lee early in 1753.5 He was predictably siding with Thomas Jenkins and Piranesi against Lord Charlemont in 1758 (see John Parker). In 1754 he sent pictures by Wilson and Mengs to Anthony Swymmer. On 8 June 1758 he exported twenty modern paintings including some copies, and on 10 June some marbles.6 In October 1761 he had introduced George Dance to the Duchess of Bridgewater and her husband, Sir Richard Lyttleton, and to Thomas Pitt (later Lord Camelford).7 On 25 January 1762 Russel exported from Rome some modern copper vases and a bas-relief of marble, and on 30 March 1763 four portraits by Batoni and seven landscapes by a living English artist.8 On 11 March 1763 Crespin wrote from Rome that that winter both the Abbé Venuti and Russel had been 'confined with tedious and rather painful illnesses, Russell within these few days has mended and hopes in about a week he may be able to move, at least, to some of the Palaces'.9 But Russel died in August at S. Casciano dei Bagni near Radicofani,10 Lumisden saying he had died a Catholic.11 On 6 February 1769 four of Russel's 'really capital pictures', by Raphael, Titian, Gaspard Poussin and Guercino were being advertised for sale at Christie's.

Travelling with John Hetherington and Moses Bernege,1 Lord Russell had arrived in Rome by 30 November 1730.2 On 2 March 1731 he had just arrived in Florence from Rome,3 and a week later one Fournereau, a Jacobite, was sharing house with him.4 He was in Venice for Ascension in 1731 and went on to Bologna to hear the opera.5 Hetherington alone signed the visitors' book at Padua University on 29 May.6 It seems probable that in Venice Russell met Canaletto who subsequently painted twenty views for him, the first paid for in 1733.7 Russell was back in England by October 1731, when he married Lady Diana Spencer.

There is past by here in some haste for Rome one Mr Russell whom I am told was formerly City Sword Bearer, a comely man of about sixty' (SP 98/34; Skinner, 19 Nov. 1732).

Young Dr Rutherford' climbed Vesuvius with Patrick Home sometime in the spring of 1774; in Naples he was attending Lord Morton, who died in Sicily in September 1774 (Home letter bk.MSS, 15 Oct. 1774, and acct.bk.MSS).

Rutherfurd, 'a most worthy and sensible man', was a merchant at Leghorn from c.1737.1 He had corresponded with Sir Hew Dalrymple from Genoa in 1741-2 concerning the shipment of pictures from Leghorn,2 and the firm of Jackson, Hart & Rutherfurd was active in Leghorn in 1749.3 In 1760-2 Rutherfurd and Jackson took particular care of Benjamin West, having already a number of contacts with Philadelphia. Rutherfurd had already made 'a small fortune that satisfied his very moderate ambition' when, through his friend the British consul Sir John Dick, he was made agent for the Russian fleet at Leghorn during the Russo-Turkish wars 1770-5 (see John Dick). For his services he was created, 'contrary to his will', a Baron of the Russian Empire in 1775 (after he had refused the Order of St Anne). He returned to Scotland in the summer of 1777.4

Ryland travelled in France and Italy for 'a few years' under the patronage of Sir Watkin Williams Wynn, 3rd Bt., his godfather, with a Mr H. of Cornwall, the painter Edward Abbott and the engraver Gabriel Smith, school-fellows and fellow Catholics.1 The identity of Gabriel Smith is not altogether certain.2 Ryland is said to have studied at the Academy in Rome, he appears to have been back in England soon after the accession of George III in 1760


Charles Sackville was in Padua in June 1765, the 'Italianised friend' of the Abbé Melchiore Cesaroti, whom he introduced to English literature.1 Sackville subsequently became a partner in the Herries bank in London and died in Venice on 18 December 1795,2 aged 53.3 He may be identified as the 'Jacholle' travelling with Lady Herries who arrived in Verona on 16 September 1794 and in Venice on 6 December (see Lady Herries), and the 'Mr Sacheville' who had arrived in Venice with Lady Mary Adams on 3 June.4

Mr Sage in Turin had heard nothing of his son 'who is continually on his voyage' to the Indies (Pickersgill letters MSS, n.d. [late autumn 1761]).
In 1705 he began a five-year tour of Europe, travelling through Holland, Germany and Austria to Venice; he remained in Italy until 1710 (DNB). He was in Padua on 25 May 1707 (Brown 1307).
A pleasant man who could nevertheless be silent for days,1 St Asaph was accompanied by a Mr St Germain for at least part of his grand tour. His travel diary (St Asaph jnl.MSS.) supplies his itinerary and lists his extensive social engagements. In Venice he dined with John Strange and [William?] Wynne; in Turin he and St Germain were presented at Court by Mountstuart on 11 August,2 and in Milan he was presented to the Archduke. In Florence he appears to have been particularly sociable, dining with Robert Merry and Louis Dutens (10 September) and being presented to the Grand Duke; he was received by Sir Horace Mann and he met John Udny, Lord Cowper, Lord Algernon Percy and Lord Cholmondeley on several occasions. In Rome he mentioned the artists Volpato, Angelica Kauffman and Christopher Hewetson (17 December) and he followed a course of antiquities with James Byres, beginning on 12 December. He was with Sir George and Lady Beaumont and the Abbé Grant at Colonel Clark's on 20 February 1783, and attended a masque with William Bromley, Charles Parker and the Beaumonts on 26 February. The following day he was in the Corso with the Beaumonts and Parker, and on 29 March he was at Mrs Hamilton's [Mrs Hugh Hamilton, wife of the artist?] with the Beaumonts and a Miss Copley.3 He did not return through Venice.4  St Asaph returned to Florence c.1825 to live in the Villa Pasquale until the end of his life. The Ashburnham Collection (which was sold in 1953, Sotheby's, 24 Jun.) already included many fine old masters and it is impossible to establish what St Asaph added from his tour.
In 1748 St Clair was sent as special envoy to Vienna and Turin (in succession to General Thomas Wentworth) with David Hume, James Grant (1720-1806) and Sir Harry Erskine as his aides, see Hume. He arrived in Turin on 8 May (apparently a week before his aides) and left on 29 November.1 In October Coutts bank had been arranging credit for him in Lyons and Paris for his return journey.2
A Scot named St Clair of the pretender's party lately arrived from Naples' was in Rome on 4 April 1722.1 Mr St Clair, probably the same, left Rome on 7 April 1723 for Florence, with Edward Finch, a Mr Pelham and John Innes.2
A Scot, he had been in Italy as bear-leader to Ashe Windham of Felbrigg in 1693-6. In March 1704 St Clair, described as a 'well-wisher to English antiquities' was again 'going beyond the sea', this time with Thomas de Grey of Merton, Ashe Windham's future brother-in-law, see De Grey.

Lord St George went to Naples with his wife and daughter to recover his health, but died there on 19 December 1774.1 William Hamilton immediately emphasised to his nephew Charles Greville the charms of the surviving daughter, Emilia Olivia (d. 1798, who m. 1775 the 2nd Duke of Leinster): 'a fine girl', whose father had 'left her clear 6000£ per ann. She dances admirably, & is accomplished, le nez un peu retroussé'.2  After her husband's death, Lady St George appears to have spent much time in Italy. She was in Rome at Easter 1775, living by the Strada Frattina.3 She was in Florence in December 1783,4 and in Venice in May 1788.5 By September 1790, when she was in Pisa, she had married again, a chevalier Ducours [Destours].6 In 1790 Mrs Barry dedicated to her Maria, a Persian Slave. From November 1791 to April 1792 she was again in Venice, from 17 March 1792 accompanied by 'il cav. d'Attur[?Ducours] Francese'.7

Mr St George' was in Venice in August-September 1744.1 In February 1745 he attended the dinner given there by Lord Holderness for the Society of Dilettanti, and his membership was successfully proposed in April.2 An undated draft letter from William Drake (1723-96) of Shardeloes, refers to Mr St George as about to come to Rome.3


The St John whom the Duke of Shrewsbury met in Rome in November 1701 and February 17021 was probably the Francis St John in Padua on 23 April 1702.2  He was also conceivably the author of an unattributed journal of 1699-1701 (Anon.MSS 1699- 1702) describing a journey through Europe to Italy, during which the writer stayed in Turin (4-14 Apr. 1700), Milan (1-25 Apr.), Genoa (-10 May), Florence (17-27 May), Siena (-Oct.), before arriving in Rome (where the journal ends); it contains a reference to 'my cousin Elizabeth St John' who died on 16 October 1699.
George St John was appointed British ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the Italian states in July 1714,1 and was expected in Geneva in April 1715.2 On 1 December 1715 he came from Milan to Padua.3 A week later the new British resident, Alexander Cunningham, wrote from Venice that St John was not staying for the Carnival, nor was he going to Rome, 'his father having writ to him to return home forthwith, and procured him libertie to serve in the Kings army against the Rebells'.4 But shortly after reaching Venice St John was taken ill with fever and died there on 3 January 1716; he was buried on the Lido 'being accompanied by my Lord Harrold, the Resident and all the Gent of the Nation. As they passed, the English ships that were in port fired their gunns, and put up their flags, and evry thing was done wt great order and decencie by order of the Resident'.5
St John accompanied the Duke of York in Italy in 1763-4, without enjoying the best of health. 'Poor Mr St John' was much fatigued by the Duke's hurried itinerary and was 'left at two or three Places not being able to follow, & they think [he] is going fast into a consumption; I believe tis a distemper in his family', wrote Lady Mary Coke.1 He was ill in Rome, where he nevertheless sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 276; priv. coll.). At Florence Patch etched his caricature portrait and included him in the lost picture of The Duke of York leaving Florence. Richard Brompton included him in the conversation piece showing the Duke of York with his friends (see Brompton).
Soon after marrying for the second time in June 1748, Lord St John brought his young wife Hester to Italy. They were in Rome in October 1748, when he commissioned three paintings from Joseph Vernet,1 and went on to Naples early in November.2 Lord St John died on 4 December,3 and on 3 January 1749 Horace Mann was daily expecting 'the widow St John' in Florence; on 31 January he wrote that she 'arrived lately from Rome and resolved not to see any man during her stay here, not to renew her affliction for her Lord.'4 She departed for England on 28 January travelling with Smith and Schutz who, according to Mann, were 'puny sparks' whom she probably did not consider men.5

Poor Mr St John, the madman in religion', resided in Tuscany from c.1723. For a considerable time 'he was quite out of his senses, and confined by order of [the Tuscan] government'; released by 1738, he became a prominent Jacobite in 1745.1 A convert to and from Catholicism, in 1742 he was trying to convert the Jews in Leghorn, a subject on which he corresponded with the British chaplain there, the Rev. Thomas Horton.2 In April 1743 he was sending Horace Mann all his letters written in Latin to his confessor.3 In December 1745 he still kept 'a country house about two miles [from Florence] where he has a very large library and all his furniture which he sent from England'.1 His sister Anna (who d. c.1742) had married the painter Grisoni.4 In January 1746 Mann said St John was 'outrageous and rebelliously mad', and in January 1747 St John was proposing the unification of the English and Roman churches.5

By November 1748 St Leger had established an unenviable reputation through his flagrant disrespect towards the ladies of Turin, with whom he had been intimately familiar 'within this last two or three years'.1 Generally known as Jack St Leger, he had been the wild companion of Lord Charlemont's youth in Dublin and they met again in Italy, probably in Rome early in 1749, when St Leger was staying in the Porta Pinciana ('Monsu Sanlaxe Ingles.eret.23').2 He had arrived with a recommendation from Horace Mann to Cardinal Albani. Mann mistakenly believed him to be Lord Doneraile's heir.3 In an undated letter, Richard Marlay wrote to Charlemont from Dublin 'I am told Mr St Leger is a great favourite with the Pope. My Lady St Leger (Lavinia) says they often drink a jolly bottle together' toasting the Church and the cardinals with crude ribaldry and added 'but there are many here rude enough to doubt the lady's veracity'.4  In March 1749 there was a dispute with his French servant over wages. The man took his grievance to the courts with the backing of the French ambassador. Advised by Mann to make himself scarce, St Leger went to Naples, leaving some belongings with the Dutch consul Mr Born. Born, whose associate Mark Parker had been banished by the Inquisition, was terrified when the sbirri descended on him to seize St Leger's goods, and Mann and Albani were very uneasy that their involvement with Born should be discovered.  St Leger, unabashed, continued to try to make use of Mann and wrote reminding him of a letter of introduction to be got from Prince Craon to his daughter, wife of M. de Mirepoix, ambassador to England. The Prince in haste included him in a letter introducing Horace Walpole, which was despatched after being surreptitiously opened by Mann on 23 May.5 Walpole wrote on 4 June that he had no mind to deliver it: 'one hates to be coupled with a romping greyhound puppy ... I did not want to be introduced to Madame de Mierpoix's asemblies, but to be acquainted with her. By thrusting St Leger into the letter with me ... I shall not wonder if she takes me for his bearleader, his travelling governor'.6 By July St Leger was again in Rome and this time there was a quarrel with a Roman knight who was arrested, and St Leger, being well satisfied in this affair, stayed on until December. Mrs Bellamy, the actress, described him on his arrival back in England as having 'a good understanding, a fine figure and a handsome face, he had in his manner a good deal of the coxcomb, which had received no little addition for his having made the grand tour ... He had on a white surtout, with a crimson cope, a French waistcoat, his hair en papillote, a feather in his hat, a couteau de chasse by his side, with a small cane hanging to his button, and attended by two Italian greyhounds.7
Stosch reported that St Paul was dismissed from the Pretender's service in December 1722, although he was still with the Jacobite court in June 1723 (SP 85/14, f.201; Walton, 22 Dec. 1722).
At Easter 1700 'L. Contessa Salsberi Veda' was living on the Strada Paolina in Rome.1 On Christmas Day 'Lady Salisbury, followed at a modest lover's distance by Colonel Josselyn' was about to leave Rome for Venice.2 One of her brothers-in-law, the Hon. Charles Cecil, was with her in Rome, and another, the Hon. George Cecil, was with her in Padua on 2 June 1701.3

Lord Salisbury probably attended the Turin Academy in the latter part of 1732; in January 1733 he was in Milan, where the 2nd Earl Stanhope said he 'found all the English Gentlemen ... that left Turin in my time', including Lord Salisbury, who was 'in great haste to be hurrying away to Venice, and accordingly is set out post this morning for that Place'.1 Salisbury was making plans to go to Rome at the end of February with Stanhope, Sir Thomas Twisden and others.2 In May he was in Venice with Twisden.3 On 25 June he was in Padua.4 It was at this time that he sat to Rosalba Carriera for the portrait dated 1733 at Hatfield; she was paid for two pictures which Salisbury brought back to England.5  In July he was in France, intending to return to Venice for the Carnival.6 In October he arrived in Florence from Turin, and on 7 November he was about to leave for Rome with Sir Marmaduke Constable and Samuel Haynes.7 During the first three months of 1734 he was still in Rome,8 and on 14 April he returned to Venice, having taken seven days to travel from Rome: 'he talks of staying here but a few days, and designs to go to Vienna', Neil Brown reported.9 At the end of the month he set off for England with the 3rd Earl of Radnor,10 having told the British ambassador Lord Essex on 24 April that he hoped to see him in Turin in about a week's time.11



Presumably the J. Salmon 'Antiquarian, late of Rome', author of A Description of the Works of Art of Ancient and Modern Rome, particularly in Architecture, Sculpture and Painting. To which is added a Tour through the Cities and Towns in the Environs of that Metropolis. Carefully collated with the best Authorities [1798- 1800].
John Salmon 'con sua sorella d'Inghilterra' passed through Bassano on 18 October 1795, and thereafter 'Giovanni Salmon Inglese Negoziante' was frequently in the Veneto, apparently travelling in Italy and Germany (ASV is 776, 777, 780, 781, 782, 783).



In the preface to his Roma Illustrata: or, a Description Of the most Beautiful Pieces of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture, Antique and Modern, at and near Rome [1721], Samber said he was in Rome in 1706 and stayed 'in and about that City nine months'. His book was based on Raguenet's Les Monuments de Rome [1700], but omits, for example, his description of Guido Reni's Trinity since he 'would give no offence to Protestant Ears'.
On 9 November 1706 Samwell, with his tutor François Grimaudet, left Augsburg for Venice with Humphrey Chetham.1 On 9 December Samwell and Grimaudet were in Padua (the same day as the Blathwayt brothers).2 On 22 November 1707 the antiquary Magnolfi in Florence told Sir John Perceval that Samwell had taken 'a set' of twenty-four heads and three statues [presumably referring to engravings].3 On 3 December James Gibbs noticed Samwell was in Rome, and described Grimaudet as 'a French gentleman'.3 In March 1708 Samwell was in Turin, where the Blathwayt brothers were proposing to travel back through Germany with him. On 31 March their tutor de Blainville wrote that, besides two French valets, Samwell had with him 'un très habile musicien' whom the younger Blathwayt had met in Rome; 'Mr Le Chevalier, qui aime cette science à la folie, a persuadé cet homme de le suivre en Angleterre ... Mr B, ... Sir Thomas et le musicien font souvent très beaux trios'.4 The musician was almost certainly the 'Roberto Valentine inglese', flautist and composer, whose op.2 flute sonata, published in Rome in 1708, was dedicated to Sir Thomas.5 The Blathwayts left Turin on 7 April, presumably with Samwell.

He was probably also the 'Mr Sandfort' who passed through Capua on 19 February 1774 (ASN cra 1259).

On leaving Cambridge without taking his degree, Lord Sandwich went to Italy, where he 'observed the remains of the Roman arts and magnificence ... in no common manner'. He spent some time in Turin, since he later said he had spent a year there and found it 'a polite and friendly court, where both French and Italian are spoken, and there you have good academies of all kinds',1 and the Duke of Savoy was enquiring after him in April 1738.2 He was in Florence in August 1737,3 where he probably first met his future wife, Dorothy Fane, who had been staying with her brother Charles, the British minister. The following year, not being satisfied 'with the beauties he had met [in Italy]', Sandwich 'bought a ship' and prepared for a Mediterranean voyage from Naples for Sicily.4 According to A Voyage performed by the late Earl of Sandwich round the Mediterranean in the years 1738 and 1739 [1799], he set out from Leghorn on 12 July 1738 aboard the Anne, but the Voyage (published after Sandwich's death and edited by John Cooke [1738-1823], his chaplain) seems inaccurate on several counts. Sandwich was in Rome in February 1738,5 and came to Naples from Rome early in March 1738.6 On 7 April Shadwell wrote from Naples that Sandwich, having spent 'about a month' there, sailed with his party 'last week'.7 His party comprised his governor (said variously to have been James Frolich8 or the Swiss Fralioli9), his friends William Ponsonby (later Viscount Duncannon and 2nd Earl of Bessborough), James Nelthorpe and John Mackye, and the French artist Liotard. In the Cliston, commanded by Captain Doran,9 they sailed from Malta to Sicily, Greece and the Greek Islands and Constantinople (where Liotard stayed), returning to Leghorn in October. On 19 October they were all in Florence, where Nelthorpe and Mackye then left his party.10 On 24 January 1739 Sandwich was still in Florence, being presented at Court with Lord Augustus Fitzroy 'and many other English Gentlemen'.11 On 20 February he left with Lords Augustus and Charles Fitzroy to go to Genoa, where they were to embark for Lisbon.12 Sandwich returned to Leghorn from Lisbon on 27 June aboard the Dolphin commanded by Lord Aubrey Beauclerk and it was then announced that he had hired a boat in Genoa for a second voyage to the Levant.13 It was probably at this time, fresh from his eastern travels, that Sandwich encountered the Président de Brosses in the Uffizi and assured him that all Greek women resembled the Medici Venus (and then extemporised a Latin couplet as a more suitable epitaph for a bust of Brutus).14  In the course of his second eastern voyage war broke out between Spain and England, but Sandwich managed to get back to Italy from Alexandria in the Faulkland with a convoy of nine merchantmen, reaching Leghorn on 23 December.15 After performing quarantine, Sandwich was briefly in Florence in January 1740,16 and on 9 February 1740 came to Turin, where he met and talked at length of his travels with Joseph Spence. 'A man that has been all over Greece, at Constantinople, Troy, the pyramids of Egypt, and the deserts of Arabia', wrote Spence, 'talks and looks with a greater air than we little people can do that have only crawled about France and Italy'. Sandwich had been expected to stay five or six weeks, but stayed 'only two or three days. He has some affairs that require very much his presence in England, and will be there in a fortnight'.17
In July 1791 the 4th Earl of Bristol asked Canova to look after 'the brother of his domestic chaplain ... on his first visit to Rome'.1 On 3 September Sandys took tea with the Flaxmans in Rome, and his name recurs in Mrs Flaxman's journal between February 1792 and December 1793.2 Flaxman sold four 'Plaisters' to Sandys in 1794.3 'F. Sandys Architecture Strada Rosella' was listed in Rome in 1793 and Francis Sandys signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus from English artists in Rome (Rome Lists 1793, 1794). He left Rome at the beginning of April 1796 and came through Vicenza to Verona on the 20th.4 In July he was telling Farington in London that he was building a Palace at Ickworth.5 The design of Ickworth was ultimately given to the Italian architect Mario Asprucci.6
The 'Sandys - landscape' painter, living with Jacob More and Francis Sandys in the Strada Rosella in Rome in 1793 (Rome List 1793), was probably the Robert Sandys who came to Florence in March 1793 and was copying in water-colour in the Uffizi in mid-April.1 It has also been supposed that the landscape painter may have been the Rev. Joseph Sandys, brother of Francis, also in the employ of the 4th Earl of Bristol as a domestic chaplain (and apparently a clerk of works at Ickworth).2
Sandys was in Padua on 6 January 1716 (the same day as Henry Tinback),1 but no more is known of his visit to Italy. Sandys returned to Italy in 1720 with his kinsman, Sir John Rushout. When they visited Padua on 23 May 1720 Sandys was said to be on his second visit to that city.2
Sandys, according to Joseph Farington, 'went to Rome in 1771 ... and was acquainted with Jacob More, the Landscape Painter ... [he] returned to England in 1774, being then 30 years old and in 1777 again went to Italy with Lord de Dunstanville (then Sir Francis Bassett) and was absent with him abt. a year and a Half'.1 He was possibly the 'Mr Sandys' in Capua with Penelope Pitt on 10 December 1772, and the 'Tandes' with Charles Bampfylde, John Barber and Derval in Florence on 7 May 1774.2 Piranesi dedicated a plate to him in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778]. He was presumably the 'Tands' mentioned by Thomas Banks in Rome in December 1777,3 and was certainly the Sandys in Venice on 26 May 1778 with Bassett.4 He subsequently corresponded with Jacob More, who sent him some of his drawings and engravings by Volpato.5

Saunders was in Rome in December 1787, 'strongly recommended' by Charles Greville, and he brought a letter from Gavin Hamilton to Sir William Hamilton in Naples,1 where he arrived on 7 January 1788. Within a day Emma (later Lady Hamilton) alleged that he had been 'astonished' by her singing and her Italian.2 He was conceivably the 'Monsu Sonders' living in Rome at Easter 1788 'seguita Strada Condotti verso il Corso'.3 He was apparently in Paris in 1789-90 studying fireproof floors (DBA), probably on his return from Italy.
A nephew of Thomas Pitt, Lord Camelford, Saunders was in Milan in 1789. He was received by Barbiano de Belgioioso, who gave him a letter of introduction to Cardinal Orazio Albani in Rome, which was acknowledged on 8 December 1790 (Belgioioso, 131; 143).
After leaving Cambridge in 1698 Savage is said to have travelled for eight years with the 5th Earl of Salisbury, visiting 'nearly every country in Europe' (DNB). In 1715 he had come to Paris after his 'seven or eight years travel in Italy and Sicily &c'.1  He was presumably the J. Savage 'Hertfordiensis' in Padua on 15 December 1709 (with William Forester) and in March 1710,2 and the 'Dr Savage at Venise' from whom John Digby parted sometime in 1710.3 'Mr Savage an English Parson' was in Florence in January 1711 when he met John Bellings,4 and at Genoa in November 1711 he was described as Lord Salisbury's quondam Tutor and 'a Beau'.5 He was elsewhere described as 'a stately man, rather corpulent' and 'a lively, pleasant, facetious old man' (DNB). He was in Rome with Lord Mark Ker on 9 March 1712 and was still there on 2 April.6 In February 1713 he was again in Padua,7 and in June 1713 'Mr Savage' was in Rome 'about a fortnight agoe ... with Capt. of Ships stayd a week & so return'd'.8 He was last recorded in Padua on 20 December 1716.9

Samuel Savage was in Venice in May 1733 at the same time as Samuel Feake.1 On 1 November he saw Martin Folkes in Rome,2 and on 26 March 1734 he was reported to have left Venice with John Olmius and the Rev. John Swinton for Vienna.3 He was elected to the Society of Dilettanti in 1738 together with Feake.






Mr Schutz was seen in Naples during the winter of 1792-3,1 and Sir William Forbes recorded meeting Mrs Schutz in Rome at the end of March, having previously met her in Naples.2 From 2 April 'Milord' Schutz was in Venice, where he was joined on 1 May by 'Lord Gray', with whom he left on the 25th.3 (In 1788 Lord Grey de Wilton had met at Marseilles a 'Mr Shutz' whom he described as 'Equerry to the Queen of England').4


An Irishman who accompanied Lord Charle mont on his tour to the East between April 1749 and early 1750, he was the friend of Francis Pierpoint Burton1 (see Charlemont). He was possibly Isabella Lumisden's 'honest friend Mr Scot' at Rome in February 1750.2




A portrait by Batoni dated 1774 (NG; Clark/ Bowron 378) is said to show John Scott of Banks Fee, Gloucestershire. A 'Scott nobile inglese' was in Florence on 9 July 1774 (Gazz. Tosc).
Robert Scott, a 'worthy and ingenious young [Scottish] Physician',1 arrived in Venice on 11 December 1769 with Robert Parnell and Thomas Fletcher.2 Scott and 'Panell' were in Florence with a Mr Preston on (or before) 23 December,3 and Scott had just arrived in Rome on 25 December, looking 'fat and sleek', and 'much pleased' with Rome 'so far as he has seen [it]'.4 He attended Margaret Forbes who described 'his pupil' as 'a genteel looking lad but Troppo delicate in constitution' - possibly Robert Parnell.4 A Mr Scott, 'bred to physick' who had 'lived abroad several years and could speak French & Italian', was recommended as a suitable travelling tutor to the 8th Duke of Hamilton in 1772.5
Captain Scott's journal (Scott jnl.MSS) is factual and records barometric readings. He sailed from Falmouth with William Henry Charteris and they reached Genoa from Catalonia on 17 April 1787. From Genoa they sailed to Lerici and stayed at Megit's hotel in Florence, where on 8 May Scott dined with the British acting consul, Horatio Mann (Sir Horace had died on 17 November 1786), and later with John Udny (who was to succeed Horatio Mann at the end of the month). At Viterbo they saw the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester who were bound for Florence. Scott had previously contacted Thomas Jenkins who met them in Rome, where they stayed two nights in lodgings provided by Innis, a tailor. They went straight on to Naples and on their way Scott admired the thirty completed miles of the new Appian Way. He spent three weeks in Naples, meeting an old friend, the merchant Valline, as well as Sir William Hamilton. He climbed Vesuvius and visited the islands of Ischia and Procida. On 12 June Charteris, 'my fellow traveller ever since I left London,' left Naples, being called home by urgent business affairs.
The Scott noticed in Rome in the winter of 1783-41 was probably also the Major Scott in Florence with whom Sir James Hall visited the Uffizi and Pitti and went to the theatre on 10 and 12 November 1784,2 and the Major Scott noticed by Henry Quin in Rome during the winter of 1785-6.3

Scrafton was in Rome in March 1763 and was one of the first of Angelica Kauffman's sitters - though the portrait had not 'all the likeness that others have had'.1 In July 1764 Anton Maron had copied for him part of Annibale Carracci's Farnese ceiling and in September he had 'lately finished' for him a copy of Guido Reni's Aurora.2

Scrope arrived in Rome in December 1751, after spending two months in Paris and having passed through Turin, Milan and 'all the remarkable towns'. At Turin he had joined in the celebrations for the birth of the Duke of Burgundy and had met the King of Sardinia [Charles Emmanuel III] 'the most insignificant fellow I ever saw, and more like the late Lord Rockingham than anybody I can now think of'. From Milan to Rome he passed through 'prodigious and rich fertile countries, with most wretched and miserably poor inhabitants'.1 He intended to stay in Rome for three months: on 20 April 1752 he witnessed a wager between Lord Charlemont and Sir Thomas Kennedy,2 and he was one of several who suppported Charlemont's venture to establish an academy in Rome for British students of painting and sculpture.3 In the spring he visited Tivoli, Palestrina and Antium with James Russel, Benjamin Lethieullier, Lascelles Iremonger, Lord Bruce and Sir Thomas Kennedy; by the beginning of June this party (less Russel) was in Naples,4 Scrope and Kennedy having passed through Capua on 21 May.5  In March 1754 a 'Mr Scroup', probably the same, was involved in an affray with a Neapolitan in Rome,6 an incident which accords well enough with Scrope's subsequent intemperate character. On 20 April Scrope was about to leave Rome, determined to go straight to Genoa via Siena.7
On his arrival in Florence, Lord Scudamore visited the Duke of Shrewsbury on 29 September 1701.1 On 18 January 1702 'J. Scudamore' was in Padua.2 His travel diary with notes on Italy is in the Hereford public library (local coll.920).
He was in partnership with George Henshawe in Genoa from c.16901 and was presumably the Scudamore whom Francis St John met in Genoa in April-May 1701.2 He was appointed British consul in Genoa in January 1710, but he died there in July; George Henshawe was to succeed him.3
On 16 October 1704 'Mr Scudamere' arrived in Rome, where, by the following April, he had seen the Duke of Shrewsbury on at least four occasions.1 At Easter 1705 he was living with his tutor 'Guglielmo Strahan' near the Strada della Croce.2 On 22 April Christian Cole recommended Scudamore to Rosalba Carriera in Venice (though she was apparently unable to take his portrait).3 In May the Duke of Shrewsbury saw him in Venice with Strahan,4 and on 6 June John Scudamore and William Strahan were in Padua.5
A Jacobite Irish tailor, he was established in Florence by 1725.1 In September 1733 he was described as one of the Jacobite Irishman Thomas Tyrrell's 'creatures' who had contrived the arrest of the jeweller William Dugood.2 In August 1741 he was involved in a law suit with a married woman called Mary, once a servant to Lady Pomfret; by 1741 he was letting furnished rooms to English travellers and he is mentioned in Horace Mann's letters up to June 1743.3
In November 1746 Sebright was introduced by Horace Mann in Florence to Cardinal Albani in Rome,1 and on the 22nd he was reported in Naples with the 3rd Earl of March.2 Sebright was proposed as a member of the Society of Dilettanti by Sir James Gray in Venice in a letter of 23 November 1746,3 perhaps indicating he had already visited Venice.

Lucas Selfe left England with his friend E. Wallis in June 1721. They came to Italy through Germany and were in Padua on 7 September.1 By 17 October they were in Rome, staying at 'Mr Hyde's House' near Monte Cavallo. On 28 April 1722 they arrived in Padua from Rome, leaving eight days later for Frankfurt.2
They sailed to Marseilles from Leghorn on 12 November 1786 with Peter Cowling, who found them 'very accommodating, good-humour'd & friendly' (Cowling jnl.MSS).
Selwyn is said to have made the grand tour with George Montagu in 1739-44 (DNB) with whom he was about to return to England from Rheims in September 1739.1 Selwyn alone was in Turin sometime between October 1739 and September 1740.2  Between May and October 1778 Selwyn was in Milan, staying with the marchese Fagnani. He believed himself to be the father of the marchesa's daughter Maria (Mimi), a claim disputed by the 4th Duke of Queensberry (previously 3rd Earl of March), and he wished to have her back in England as his adopted daughter. On his journey out he had left Paris on 13 May and was about to leave Paris on his return journey on 18 November.3 He had agreed with her parents that in April 1779 Mimi  hould be brought to Lyons where Selwyn would place her in a convent4 (in 1798 she became the 3rd Marchioness of Hertford).



In 1733 Mr Semple, 'Lord Semple's brother,' offered his services as a spy for the British government through Brinley Skinner, the consul at Leghorn.1 It was agreed that he should be encouraged and furnished with money to go to Rome.2 Semple immediately wrote Skinner a confidential letter, which was forwarded to Whitehall on 7 March, giving the names of the principal Jacobites in Rome.3  Three note books, dated 1732 and 1733, in the Sempill MSS at Craigevar Castle, are probably by the same 'Semple'; the traveller was in Rome between January and June 1733.4 He had frequented the Prince Borghese and met the antiquarian Fontanini, Archbishop of Ancyra and formerly librarian to Cardinal Imperiali, and Leproti, the Pope's physician; he considered painting and architecture 'to be on the declining hand': Borromini's 'whims and oddities' comparing poorly with Galilei's noble simplicity; 'the most renowned painters now alive are old Francesco Imperiali, Paolo Panini for antiquities and perspectives. The sciences are at a very low ebb'; modern Romans, he wrote, 'are generally ignorant of the Antiquities and fine things that surround them owing perhaps to the want of novelty'.
An Irish Abbé, he was in Rome in July 1778 when Henry Swinburne remarked on his 'Irishisms' (e.g. an English lady had come specially to Rome to sit to Batoni for her son's picture).1 In October 1779 Sir William Hamilton was seeking permission for the 'abate Sennet Sacorderote Irlandese, che fu un tempo novizio tra i Gesuiti', a friend of Mrs Henry Swinburne, to spend the winter in Naples for health reasons,2 and he duly joined the Swinburnes that month to spend a short time in Naples. In April 1787 he left Rome attending Prince Rezzonico to England, leaving debts behind him but with the intention of publishing an Italian-English grammar 'which will only serve to betray his neglect of both languages', said Father Thorpe, who also commented on his self-assumed title of Doctor.3

Serle, 'a grave old Gentn who is reckoned to have an estate of neare £100,000 sterling',1 was a merchant in Leghorn, where he died aged seventy-eight on 11 March 1712.2 In August 1704 it was reported that his sixteen-year-old niece, 'N', had been abducted from his home by a priest, Belisario Benvenuti, and placed in the convent of S.Fiorenzo in Pisa; her release, and punishment for the priest, was being demanded. In narrating this circumstance, Lambert Blackwell called Serle a relation of Lord Chandos (James, 8th Baron).3
Early in 1789 Serres left England and travelled through France to Italy. He sailed from Genoa to Leghorn, where he met John Udny, the British consul to whom Reynolds had given him a letter of introduction. From Leghorn he went on to Pisa, Florence and Rome, where he passed the five winter months.1 In February 1791 he was in Rome dining with the Flaxmans,2 and in March and April he was based in Naples, there being dated drawings from this period (Vesuvius, 9 Mar.; Capri, 11 Apr.; Ischia, 12 Apr., and Procida, 13 Apr.).3 He returned to Rome in May, taking his final leave of the Flaxmans on the 15th.2 Further drawings of Civitta Castellana (17 May) and Terni (18 May) are in a sketchbook which was on the London art market in 1953.
Seton arrived in Rome in 1758,1 and Robert Mylne mentioned him there in February.2 At Easter 1759 he was living on the Strada della Croce.3 In January 1759 he had been one of several English artists attending the affairs of Jonathan Skelton (who had died in Rome on 19 January), and in May Seton 'who will be here after in England & consequently better witness than people of an other country' signed a copy of Skelton's [English] will.4 On 3 March 1759 Richard Dalton had said that Seton and Nevay were studying hard 'and hope will succeed in the portraits well', and on 21 May he referred to Seton having bought a collection of drawings from Hamerani.5 He had presumably returned home by 1761 when he exhibited at the SA in London.


Matthew Sewell accompanied John Hanbury to Italy in 1724. In October 1724 Hanbury was said to be going to Leghorn before Venice,1 and Sewell arrived in Rome with John Hanbury and a Mr Downing in December 1724. Stosch stated they were loyal to the King, and introduced Sewell to Cardinal Alberoni later that month. On 21 January 1725 Sewell, with Downing and Hanbury, left Rome for Naples, but they had returned by 17 February. By 21 April Hanbury and Sewell who, according to Stosch, had prevented several young English travellers from falling into the hands of the Jacobites, had left for Hanover, while Downing went to France,2 but on 18 June 'Mathews' Sewell and John Hanbury were in Padua.3 In July 1725 Rosalba Carriera began a portrait of 'Mr Sewel', and in September had begun a pastel portrait of 'Mr Seven inglese', conceivably the same;4 Hanbury had also sat in Venice to an unknown painter, his portrait costing 11 guineas.5 Hanbury, presumably with Sewell, was back in England by January 1726.5 An account book for Hanbury's tour, giving their itinerary and detailed expenditure (Italian lessons and gambling losses, for example), was recorded in 1929.5
Henry Seymour was in Florence in January 1751,1 and was presumably the Mr Seymour who gave encouragement to the young James Russel in Rome sometime in 1751-2.2 Seymour had again 'gone abroad' in June 1752 after his intended marriage with Lady Diana Egerton had fallen through,3 but he was next in Italy, it appears, in 1774-5, with his two daughters by his first wife, Caroline (b. 1755) and Georgiana (b. 1756). 'Mylord Symur con due sue sig. Figlie' arrived in Florence by 8 October 1774 to stay with Lord Cowper, his brother-in-law.4 He had intended to stay in Florence through the summer of 1775, but his daughter Caroline's engagement to William Danby led to their departure on 11 May, but not before Seymour had shown a certain preference for the Countess of Albany, the Young Pretender's young wife.5 On 13 May 1775 they passed through Pisa on their way to London (the daughters named as 'Carlotta' and 'Georgina').4 For Caroline Seymour's subsequent visit to Italy in 1788, see William Danby.


After a distinguished career as physician, Shadwell retired abroad between 1735 and 1740 with his second wife and the two daughters from his first marriage, Catherine and Molly. On 10 March 1736 he left Florence with his family for Naples.1 He also apparently spent some time in Rome since he later referred to 'my friend the Pope'.2 He was well established in Naples by March 1737, his daughter Catherine having married that year the British consul Edward Allen. In April Shadwell had written to the Duke of Newcastle supporting Allen's claim to preferment, stressing that he had given a good character of Allen 'many months ago, before there were any thoughts of his being my son-in-law'.3 His other daughter Molly, 'Mademoiselle Misse Molli', also attracted attention. In March 1737 it was said that everyone coming from Naples to Rome talked of her attractions and that her father had even advertised in a Naples gazette for a rich merchant 'qui marquoit du goût pour sa fille, et qui étoit véritablement riche afin de devenir son beau-fils'.4 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who had met Lady Shadwell in Venice (sometime after September 1739), once said Sir John was famous for his 'Romanceing'.5 By June 1737 Shadwell and his family had moved into consul Allen's house; 'cette belle famille ne pense plus à quitter ce pais'.6 In August 1737 Allan Ramsay said he was always welcome 'to several English houses [in Naples], particularly Sir John Shadwell's which with the addition of the Consul's family make a very pretty society of themselves'.7 On 9 April 1739 Shadwell arrived back in Florence,8 and in August he was attending Lord Charles Fitzroy in Genoa.9 By July 1740 he was back in England with his family.5
Shaftesbury, the celebrated heterodox whig philosopher whose health had prevented him pursuing a political career, had made his grand tour as a young man in 1686-9. In 1711, suffering from increasingly poor health, he decided to retire to southern Italy, and on completing the Characteristicks for the press, and leaving behind his five-month-old son (subsequently the 4th Earl), he sailed from Dover on 2 July. He was accompanied by his Countess, 'surely the Best Huswife as well as Wife, Nurse, & Friend that was ever Known in her whole sex'.1 There were eleven in his party, including Frances Whitney (lady-in-waiting), his steward Bryan Wheelock (who married Frances while in Italy, and returned to England in November 1712), Mrs Belle Skinner (who returned to England soon after the party reached Naples), and Paul Crell.  Their journey through southern France was facilitated by the Duke of Berwick, then encamped on the frontier of Piedmont, his French armies ranged against the Imperial troops. After crossing the Alps, Shaftesbury was very weak and stayed three weeks in Turin. He travelled slowly in a litter, covering some twenty miles a day, finally reaching Naples on 15 November. They lived in the Palazzo Mirelli where Shaftesbury was regularly attended by the physician of the Spanish viceroy (Count Borromeo). For the first months of 1712 he was confined to the Palazzo but busied himself with the revision of the Characteristicks for a second illustrated edition. James Fagan, whom he had met in Rome, helped him find a suitable artist, Henry Trench, and Shaftesbury corresponded at length with his printer concerning the plates.  Early in 1712 he acquired a copy of a Galatea by the Neapolitan painter Paolo de Matteis, from whom he then commissioned The Judgment of Hercules (Ashmolean Museum, Oxford), a subject which, Shaftesbury explained, 'carrys so much of my own Thought, Design, and I may allmost say Workmanship' (1 May 1712). His advice to Matteis (written in French; the only language they shared), was published in France in 1712. The picture was finished in April 1712 and Shaftesbury's son subsequently framed it in an extravagant, gilded rococo frame, although his father had specified the frame 'must be plain and of dark colourd or black Wood, not shining' (1 Sep. 1712). Matteis, who completed a reduced replica by the end of June (Leeds AG), worked in the Palazzo Mirelli, as did Trench from April to September. 'Some few men of Art and Science, the Virtuosi of this Place', such as Giuseppe Valetta and Paolo Mattia Doria, also visited the Palazzo to talk with Shaftesbury. In April 1712 Shaftesbury began to go out again in a sedan chair, showing his Countess the scenes he had visited over twenty years before, and visiting the picture dealer Niccolo Porcinaro. He complained to Fagan (21 May 1712) that Porcinaro's pictures were too expensive and entrusted Trench with 'like affaires, while in my Family'. Shaftesbury bought numerous medals, prints and books and also works of art for his English friends: in June 1712 he was pleased to keep two Salvator Rosa landscapes when Sir John Cropley declined them (sold Christie's, 26 Nov. 1966), and he bought other pictures from the monastery of Monte Oliveto in November 1712. When Trench had returned to Rome Shaftesbury sent him (12 Sep. 1712) a Memorandum seeking information on various subjects - artists, engravers and sculptors, new works by Chiari (Trench's teacher), archaeological discoveries and sales of works of art.  In October the Spanish viceroy was ordered to expel the English from Naples but, through the agency of General Stanhope, Shaftesbury was allowed to stay. His health finally declined that winter; in November he suffered a particularly severe bout of asthma and he died on 15 February 1713. He had discussed a final commission with Matteis, a portrait of himself on his death bed set in a virtuoso's cabinet with a sketch of the Judgment of Hercules on the wall and a glimpse of Vesuvius beyond. His Countess, whom he had told to return to England immediately on his death, was still in Naples in February and she arrived home two weeks before Shaftesbury's body (buried at Wimborne St Giles in June). Shaftesbury's correspondence and expenditure on works of art in Naples have been separately published.2
The least known of the Earls of Shaftesbury, in 1782 the 5th Earl sat to Batoni in Rome (Clark/Bowron 438; priv. coll.). On 18 December that year he was in a large party viewing the illumination of St Peter's and on the 28th he took leave of Allan Ramsay in Rome.1  On 27 January 1784 Shaftesbury gave a dinner in Naples, attended by the Asshetons, Jonas Brooke and John Parkinson.2 He was in Florence in April1 and in Turin by 6 June;3 and by November he was in Paris.4 In both 1782 and 1784 a Mr Chace / Chase was with Shaftesbury, apparently Thomas Chase, sometime Lord Tylney's attendant. In Naples (before 1807) Shaftesbury bought for £300 a fine ewer and basin of Genoese silver, on which the Shaftesbury arms were discreetly engraved.5 Shaftesbury's widow died in Florence in 1819, aged fifty-seven.
With his tutor Pinchbeck, Shales was at Marino, just south of Rome, on 7 October 1721, 'going for Naples in a post chaise' (Rawlinson jnl.MSS).



Shanahan travelled with the Bishop of Derry on his second visit to Italy in 1770-2, employed in making sketches of geological formations. He was not always with the Bishop; he told Strange on 14 May 1771 he was about to leave Vicenza for Rome (where he hoped to see his master), and he was still in Italy in October, about to join the Bishop and his son at Vermei (Childe-Pemberton, 1:103, 117-18).

Stosch reported Shard in Rome on 18 November 1728 with several other Englishmen,1 and J.P. Shard was in Padua on 13 October 1729.2


At the end of his distinguished career as a surgeon, Sharp went to Italy for eight months in 1765-6 and subsequently published his Letters from Italy in 1767 (page refs. cited hereafter in brackets). They contain much history, interlarded with the bluff reactions of an elderly man to the business of travel and to Italian character and customs. The Letters were at once challenged by Giuseppe Baretti in his Account of the Manners and Customs of Italy [1768], to which Sharp responded with his View of the Customs ... of Italy [1768].  Sharp did not propose giving 'descriptions of statues, churches, and pictures', which were generally tiresome, though he did not ignore works of art. At Venice he suggested that few Gentlemen 'are not, in some degree, apprized of what they are to expect from the views ... painted by Canaletti', but buildings in pictures are 'generally more gaudy and flattering than life itself' (7). In Rome 'having paid my respects to fifty thousand [pictures] I am satiated, and grow indifferent in my visits to the second fifty thousand' (69), but he usefully described the mosaic technique being used for the pictures in St Peter's (54-8). He regretted the Thursday and Friday cattle market amongst the ruins of the Forum (53) and briefly noticed the excavations at Pompeii which were being made by 'day-labourers, but the people first employed were the galley-slaves, who proved such cursed thieves, that they were obliged to dismiss them very soon' (152).  He was depressed above all by the poverty of Italy. Padua he found 'depopulated and impoverished' (36). He emphasised the squalor and lack of sanitation in the travellers' accommodation between Venice and Rome, and the shortage of accommodation at Naples, where except 'the house where I am, and another just by it, there are only two indifferent houses of reception' (145). The countryside seemed neglected, the Campagna a 'barren desert' (50). Sharp commented on the distressing lack of income in Rome and only in Tuscany could he discern a healthier economy (228). All of which contrasted with the opulence of the Church; 'if the gold and silver lying dead in her churches' had only 'a free circulation through the country' there would be far less of the 'most pressing indigence' throughout the country (61-2). He was in Rome for Holy Week in March 1766 (193 ff.); he had witnessed the miracle of St Januarius in Naples (120ff.) and was to see a Whit Saturday service in the King's chapel in Turin (274f.).  He described how the interest of the Stuart family in Rome had 'almost worn out' (215), despite the activities of the Abbé Grant (whom he does not name as such). It was clear to him that tourism played an important part in maintaining Italian life, and there was nothing wrong with travelling other 'than what arises to the nation from the sums expended in foreign parts' (199). He respected British tourists. 'There are many English at Rome, most of them gentlemen of fortune, and most of them men who do honour to their country. I know it is received opinion in England, that our youth, who travel, fall immediately into dissipation, and disgrace their country; but I have seen no such example in Italy' (198).  One of Sharp's interesting asides is his explanation of Italian time, counting 24 hours 'from the time it is almost, but not quite dark which instant of time varying every day, renders this reckoning very inconvenient, vague, and perplexed' (164).
Dr Sharp, an Anglican minister who had turned Catholic, came to Florence from Rome in November 1731; 'c'est un Hypocrite Scélerat de première classe, et Enthousiaste Jacobite très dangereux' warned Stosch,1 and Francis Colman described him as 'Father Sharp, who was formerly a non-juring Parson, married in England & then went to France with his wife, where she became a nun & he a Papist. He has now some preferment in the Church, & goes for England, tho' he gives out that he only goes to France'.2 By 5 April he had left for Leghorn,3 and in May he was at Pisa.4 He was, presumably the Mr Scharp Anglois caricatured by P.L. Ghezzi in Rome (Sotheby's, 10 Dec. 1979).
To judge from his travel journal (Sharpe jnl.MSS), Sharpe appears to have been an Anglican theologian with a developed interest in antiquity. He spent a year in Rome from April 1701, his journal recording the names of priests, antiquaries and artists with whom he talked. His acquaintance in Rome included the Jesuits Dr George Witham, Father Parker, Father James Forbes and the Irish Don Guglielmo (once chaplain to Cardinal [Richard] Howard) and Sharpe visited the English College on 13 June. He also met Cardinal Norris (the Venetian Augustine Friar who pretended he was English). He saw much of the antiquarian Ficoroni from whom he heard (18 Aug.) that Carlo Maratti had sold a fine collection of drawings ('as Raph. and Michael Angelo') to an Englishman who had not paid, so that the Pope now designed 'to put the volumes in the Vaticane'. Ficoroni asked Sharpe 'to give him a judgement of his works in Hebrew or Greek' and showed him his collection of medals; he also took him to meet Fontani[ni], Keeper of Cardinal Imperiali's library (31 Aug.). Sharpe mentioned the antiquarians Sabbatini (4 Sep.) and Zacagna at the Vatican Library (29 Oct.). On 26 June he met the architect Gregorini. Throughout his journal he mentions English travellers, including Joseph Addison (whom he saw on 28 June), and Lord Roxburghe, who invited him to Naples on 22 December. Sharpe left Rome on 14 February 1702 and arrived in Florence on the 23rd. He left Italy at Genoa and returned home through France.


A great traveller into Egypt and the Holy Land', Shaw was in Italy during the winter of 1732-3 on his way home from Algiers, where he had been chaplain at the British Factory for many years. He was in Florence early in November 1732 and then went to Rome and Naples, where he witnessed the great earthquake of 29 November. Shaw had returned to Florence by the end of January 1733 (Spence Letters, 130, 138).
1. Patch 1967, 351. 2. CL, 27 Feb. 1986, 504.


Following the death of his first wife in January 1771, Lord Shelburne set out for Italy in May accompanied by Captain Thomas Carleton.1 Their tour lasted only five months, but had momentous consequences in terms of art patronage. On 2 July they had apparently arrived in Venice (as 'Lord Futinovije' and 'Carlo Casleton'),2 and Horace Mann later recalled meeting Shelburne in Florence.3 By 17 August Shelburne was in Rome,4 where he conceived the grand scheme for the decoration of Lansdowne House (as it became known, on the south side of Berkeley Square in London). He entered into a contract with Gavin Hamilton who agreed to supply 16 fine antique statues, 12 antique busts, 12 antique basso-relievos, 11 large historical pictures and 4 landscapes with scenes from the Trojan war, all within a four-year period for the sum of £6,050;5 see Gavin Hamilton.  Soon after his arrival in Rome Shelburne had also commissioned a landscape from James Forrester and announced his intention of having a room hung 'with pieces of the most celebrated painters now living'.6 On 14 September Father Thorpe wrote that Shelburne had had a long audience with the Pope. By the end of September he had arrived in Naples with Captain Carleton, the Abbé Grant and Thomas Jenkins, intending to stay only a few days;7 he was presented at Court and left on 9 October.8 On the 18th he left Rome,9 and on 7 November Shelburne and Carleton left Turin for England.10
By 19 May 1717 Sheldon ('Old Senior', who had previously been with the Jacobite Court at Saint-Germain-en-Laye since before 1700), had spent some time in Pesaro. He left Pesaro 'at last' early in June 1717, arriving in Rome with Charles Wogan on the 12th.1 In March 1718 he left Urbino with Sir Peter Redmond for Paris, where he arrived on 12 April.2
Sheldon was first in Italy as tutor to Richard Biddulph in 1726; Francis Colman then described him as 'a man between 40 & 50' and 'I believe a Popish Priest'.1  Eight years later, in August 1734, he sailed with his nephew, also a Sheldon, to Leghorn; Sheldon was then described as 'a tall thin man about fifty years and travelled in Italy some years ago with one Mr Beadle [sic]'.2 At Leghorn they met another nephew, the merchant Henry Scrope. By 24 August they had left for Siena to pass a few weeks before going on to Rome and the 'younger Sheldon' was then said to be marrying one of Charles Ratcliffe's [Radclyffe's] daughters3 (but he did not). By 12 October 'the Sheldons and Scroope' had arrived in Rome,4 where they associated with Jacobites.5  Henry Sheldon was Rector of the English College in Rome in 1738-44 and 1750-6 (Holt).
A forceful personality, she was brought from France in 1722 to be governess to the infant Young Pretender. Although she became a favourite of his mother, the Princess Clementina, the Pretender dismissed her in 1725; two years later Clementina installed her at Bologna (E. Cruikshanks, Ideology and Conspiracy, 193. F. McLynn, Charles Edward Stuart, 10-26).



Shelley was a Catholic when he went to Italy as a young man in 1710. In November he was in Leghorn, suffering from fever, but by January was well enough to proceed to Florence, where he dined with John Bellings on 15 February.1 A year later he was in Naples, where Charles Baldwyn briefly enjoyed his company before Shelley left on 29 February 1712.2





With Daniel Boone, Sherard arrived in Florence from Rome on 4 November 1733.1 Richard Pococke, who met him in Florence in January 1734, described him as 'a nephew of Mr Paul Methuen'.2 In September 1734 Brinley Skinner gave Sherard some melon seeds for Lady Essex (who was then in Turin).3

A William Sherard was in Padua on 28 May 1717.1 He was, presumably, the 'Sherard or Gerard', one of three 'mysterious English gentlemen' in Venice in November who had seen no one but 'Mr West a non-juror', and one of whom was suspected of being the Earl of Mar.2
On 1 September 1765 Sherdley was introduced by Louis Dutens at Court in Turin,1 and when Dutens left at the end of that month Sherdley was made chargé d'affaires.2 On 20 January 1768 James Wright told Horace Mann 'Poor Sherdley of Turin is dead'.3

In January 1723 he was reported to have been 'for some time' teaching English to the Princess Clementina, wife of the Pretender. By 22 September 1725 he was made assistant governor to the infant Young Pretender (the Hon. James Murray was his governor).1 In May and June 1737 he accompanied the Young Pretender on his tour round Italy.2 Sheridan left Rome in April 1744 to join the Young Pretender in France,3 where he died in 1746.
A very amiable good-natured man' who, said Horace Walpole, 'has a good heart and much simplicity',1 Sherlock published Letters from an English Traveller [1780], of which few are dated. He was in Switzerland, Holland Germany and Austria between April 1776 and March 1778 before reaching Rome on 1 October 1778. On 3 February 1779 he was in Naples, and in July he was passing through Berlin on his way to Potsdam.  His Letters were first published in French at Geneva in 1779, to be translated into English on his return. A second series of Nouvelles Lettres, 'written originally in French by the Rev. Martin Sherlock, A.M., Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Bristol', was published in Paris and London in 1780, with an English translation (New Letters) in 1781. The letters, abounding with generalisation and quotation, are superficial and spirited: 'I always had self-love enough, and since I am printed, I perceive I have much more' (Letters, 133). 'Mediocrity is rare here [in Italy]; everything is in extremes', Sherlock reflected; 'no citizens; an excessive luxury amongst individuals; and the people in the most abject misery. It is the same in regard to religion', and in national character - 'the Italian, in general, is exceedingly good, or wicked to a degree' (Letters, 46-7). One of his great pleasures was to have 'his Horace in one pocket, and his Virgil in the other, and to look at a thousand objects which have been painted by these masters' (New Letters, 64). He commended the view from the top of Vesuvius as the 'most perfect union of the sublime and the beautiful in nature', the same union in art being best seen in the Apollo Belvedere; it was in the Belvedere that the superiority of the Greeks to 'all the nations of the world' was most evident (Letters, 77-80).  In the course of his tour Sherlock also produced a book in Italian on literary criticism, Consiglio ad un Giovane Poeta (Naples n.d.; 2nd ed. Rome 1780); his fluency in languages seemed admirable but, wrote Walpole, his Italian was 'ten times worse than his French, and more bald'.2 Such inadequacies seem not to have deterred Sherlock. 'I sought glory, and I obtained it. My Letters had as much success, on the continent, as any prose-work of the same size published within the century, which I attribute principally to the truth and simplicity with which they were written' (New Letters, xi).


He was in Rome on 3 November 1791, when William Hamilton applied for a passport for Shield, an English Professor of Music, to visit Naples.1 In November 1792 the Flaxmans went to hear Shield perform in Rome at Jacob More's.2 Shield is said to have gone to Italy with the antiquary Joseph Ritson (1752-1803) (DNB), but Ritson may only have travelled as far as Paris.
Mr Scipping late Consul at Lisbon' was in Venice by 7 February 1716; he lent money to a Mr Gouer, an insolvent Jacobite (SP 99/61, ff.117, 123; Cunningham, 7, 21 Feb. 1716).

Shirley was in Milan in the first week of November 1731 and left for Venice with Lord Middlesex, Lord Robert Montagu and Joseph Spence,1 staying several months in their company. They were in Padua on 15 November,2 and came to Venice the same day. On 7 December Burges reported they were in Venice for the Carnival; they left late in February (according to Burges) or on 3 March (according to Spence) apparently for Rome.3 Shirley ('Charly') is next recorded in Florence by 15 July 1732, with Lord Middlesex and Lord Robert Montagu4 (who had arrived in Florence with 'four other English gentlemen' on 11 July).5 Shirley joined the Masonic Lodge which Lord Middlesex had founded in Florence.6


Shrewsbury was a distinguished, if diffident soldier and statesman, 'of so sweet a temper that he charms all that know him'. His part in bringing the Protestant William III to the English throne had brought him a Dukedom. He went to Italy as a bachelor of forty to seek a cure for his health which had never been robust (and he had lost an eye at twenty), and he spent three and a half years in Rome. Despite a cultivated detachment, he was frequently told of the diplomatic intrigues arising from the wars of the Spanish Succession and, as a former Catholic, he was constantly being approached by the Jesuit fathers. He also fell in love, sat for his portrait more than once and enjoyed antiquities.1 He arrived in Rome on 20 November and stayed in the house of Salvator Rosa's son in the Strada Gregoriana (24 Nov. 1701). His health was not good and on 20 April 1702, after spitting blood, he realised his stay would have to be 'longer than I had designed'. A Dr Lippi had seen him on his arrival; but by June 1703 Lord Somers had written to him saying he was 'truly glad to hear your bleeding is stopped'.2 In March 1705 a Maltese doctor proferred 'a secret to cure my bleeding' but, said Shrewsbury, 'he seems an ignorant quack'. He was suffering from gout in Padua in May 1705. But Shrewsbury seems never to have been unduly incapacitated.  As soon as he had arrived in Rome he began paying almost daily visits to the widowed Countess Adelaide Paleotti, a Catholic. Apart from a visit to Bologna in June-October 1702 she was in Rome throughout his stay (and in March 1703 her daughter took the veil). She was evidently attractive, for in October 1703 she received a proposal of marriage from one 'Jean Anto. St Piere', which Shrewsbury advised her to accept, and in July 1704 the young Lord Cardigan (George Brudenell, Shrewsbury's cousin) fell in love with her. Shrewsbury appears to have proposed to her in Rome in April 1705 and they were married in Augsburg in September, after she had become a Protestant. Shrewsbury said he had married 'an Italian widow lady I knew at Rome. Her being without fortune and a foreigner will make my choice censured by everybody, but I am persuaded she will approve herself so good a wife and so good a Protestant that I shall not have just cause to repent'.3  Throughout his stay Shrewsbury had to resist the overtures of the Catholic church. He did not find this hard, but he was no bigot and it was even suggested that he curtailed his visit to Rome because of rumours of his pending conversion (DNB). He talked and occasionally dined with the successive Rectors of the English Jesuit College, Father Mansfelt and Father Poscut, and he saw much of Bishop [Philip] Ellis, even though he knew 'how great a liar this prelate is' (23 Jul. 1704). He visited the house of the Irish Friars whose church was 'pretty' and had 'a good Madonna of Carlo Maratti, besides two chapels painted by him' (5 Aug. 1702). Shrewsbury was not impressed with relics and when shown Thomas à Becket's hairshirt at Lucca (23 Sep. 1701) he had commented 'One need I think only see the piece to be satisfied of the imposture'. Within the Catholic clergy, he confided in his journal, 'one sees nothing ... but pride, luxury and ignorance' (15 Mar. 1703), the Roman Church was 'full of ignorance, tricks, and error' (16 Apr. 1703), and he 'believed it more impossible for me to be a Papist than to be a Turk' (9 Sep. 1702) Even though he was officially withdrawn from public affairs, Shrewsbury continued to correspond with London, and to hear the diplomatic intrigues being whispered in Rome. At times he 'utterly rejected meddling with' attempts to involve him in such dealings and he told a French Procurator who blamed Queen Anne's policy for the war, 'that it was now too late to talk of that' (27 Jul. 1702). While he was in Rome James II died in Paris, but he did not attend the Papal ceremony held in the late King's honour on 24 January 1702. Two months later the death of William III was shamefully greeted with joy 'for the advantage the cause of religion received from it'. On 31 May 1702 he heard of his mother's death, which came just after he had been told that the office of Master of the Horse would be kept for him in Queen Anne's court: 'now', he reflected, 'I have almost been offered all the great places of the kingdom'. The successes of the Duke of Marlborough in 1704 led to a change in his position. On 4 August Shrewsbury was told that 'a year ago I was so ill in the opinion of the Pope that it was thought a crime to go near me; now that they fear the D[uke] of M[arlborough] and his red-coats should come into Italy, his Holiness does nothing but commend me'. In more local affairs Shrewsbury wrote letters in support of Sir Lambert Blackwell (envoy at Florence), and helped mediate in scuffles - as when he gave money to his footman William to escape to Leghorn after he had killed an Italian footman (23 Sep. 1703), when Jervas the painter had a brawl in a coffee house, or when his young cousin George (Lord Cardigan) accused the Princess Carpegna of cheating at cards. Shrewsbury was a cultivated man, interested in music, literature and the fine arts. He frequently attended concerts; he took lessons in Spanish (30 Apr. 1704) and translated Lucretius into Italian. He sat to Jervas for his portrait in February and March 1703, and in March 1704 he sat to a German painter 'to have a copy of my picture retouched for Comte Mattei'. On 26 March 1705 he sat to 'young David [Antonio David], the Duke of Bracciano's painter, for my picture'. He was particularly interested in architecture. He employed an 'Architect Master' in Rome and met Carlo Fontana, G.C. de Rossi, the author of Studio di Architettura Civile [1702] and Falconieri, who prepared a draft 'for a house for me' (13 Mar. 1704). Shrewsbury's initial preference for the 'noble magnificent plainesse' of older buildings gradually changed to an interest in the baroque: after ten months he confessed he observed in the buildings of Rome 'a greater nobleness of Magnificence than I remarked at first'; S.Andrea della Valle 'tho plaine', was 'yet pleasing', and the Gesu was 'noble' with 'a wonderfully rich altar' (though the interior gilding was 'gaudy'). The Villa Borghese was to become a model for the Duke's new residence, Heythrop Park (built c.1705-8 to the designs of Thomas Archer). In March 1705 Shrewsbury met the French sculptor P.E. Monnot who had just finished the tomb for the 5th Earl of Exeter. The painters which best pleased him were 'Rafael in his last mannner, Guido, Hani Caracii and Domenichine', with Guido his 'favourite'. He called on Carlo Maratti (7 Jan. 1702) and though the master was away, Shrewsbury saw his work: 'his painting does not much please me, and he is now much decayed'. He went on the same day to see Giuseppe Chiari 'a scholar of Ca. Marat's, and does now better than his master'; he called on him again on 12 August 1704. Shrewsbury also saw the English painter Thomas Edwards on several occasions.  Shrewsbury bought some paintings, both for himself and others. On 23 January 1702 he 'bespoke two tables'; Nicolo Morelli was advising him on pictures on 12 March, and on 12 September he bought some prints for Lord Godolphin. Acknowledging prints received from Italy, Lord Somers observed that Shrewsbury now appeared to be a 'vertuoso' - 'that was a quality I think you did once a little despise.'2 In September 1703 Shrewsbury bought three Salvator Rosas and a Luca Giordano; he bought four more Salvators in January 1705, two for Lord Halifax from 'Sig. Bartolomeo' (10, 31 Jan. 1705). On 5 July 1704 he described to Somers some pictures for sale by Albano, Guido Reni, Poussin, Claude and Rubens.4 By 1705 Shrewsbury had also bought paintings by 'Roza' [?Rosa de Tivioli, i.e. P.P. Roos, 1657-1706] from an Abbé who 'came to desire Roza might retouch and mend what faults there were in them' (10 Mar. 1705) and a Portia by Guido Reni, which was copied by 'Sig.Bart.' (13 Jan. 1705). Shrewsbury was several times involved with the export of works of art from Rome. In April 1704 Edward Wortley Montagu and Gogain [Gaugin] 'sealed their pictures. I desired they might be sent when I sent mine'; on 24 September 1704 he went to see his cousin George Brudenell's four chimney-pieces 'before they were packed up', and on 27 '7bre' 1702 Shrewsbury ['Il Dica di Sciorbery'] exported thirty modern paintings and two marble pictures ('due tavole di marmo giallo').5  The journal is otherwise full of incident. It describes the Roman ceremonies-the boats in the Piazza di Novona, the girandola at Castel Sant' Angelo-and exceptional occurrences, such as earthquakes in 1703 (14 January, 2 February, 8 April, and 24 May). It is filled with the names of other travellers who came to Shrewsbury as the senior British resident in Rome. On 9 November 1704, for example, 'All the English gentlemen in town dined with me. We were 14 at table'. He had an extensive Italian acquaintance of whom the Duke of Bracciano and the Princess Carpegna (who 'used to honour me with her confidence'; 28 Sep. 1702) are frequently mentioned.  Shrewsbury eventually left Rome on 27 April 1705. He toured in the Veneto for two months, but missed Ascension in Venice because of 'gout in my elbow' while in Padua. As he left Venice on 5 July 1705, he wrote 'it is the only great city I ever was in where I declare I could not live, for there is no place to walk and take the air, and I think the air moist and unwholesome' (5 Jul. 1705).
On 16 February Lord Shrewsbury thanked Sir William Hamilton for his help in Naples;1 'Il Mylord de Shrewsbury' was then in Venice between 12 and 19 May.2
Shrewsbury, a Catholic whose God, said Francis Dashwood, 'was an angry old man in a blue cloak', travelled with his tutor Bulstrode. He was in Florence in December 1739 and January 1740.1 By 16 March he had arrived in Venice with Charles-Just, Prince de Beauvau; they stayed a month before going on to Rome to witness the conclave to elect Clement XII's successor.2 Shrewsbury was in Rome by 16 April,3 by which time Stosch suspected that Bulstrode would 'seduce' his pupil into Jacobite principles.4 By 23 April Bulstrode had left with Beauvau for Naples; Horace Walpole, like Stosch, was suspicious of Bulstrode as 'not the most faithful'.5 Shrewsbury and Bulstrode were mixing in Jacobite circles at Albano early in June; Walpole then calling Bulstrode 'a simpleton' and saying Shrewsbury was going with the Countess Mahony to join her husband [in Naples?].6 By 25 September Shrewsbury had arrived in Florence from Rome,7 and left on 10 November.8 On his return journey Shrewsbury spent some time in France before reaching England in September 1741; Bulstrode then stayed in Boulogne to take charge of Shrewsbury's young brothers,9 but see Alban Butler.

Colonel Shuckburgh and his wife, 'eternal players at whisk', were in Florence in July 1750.1 They were in Rome in January 1751, when 'generally about 30 Lords & Gentlemen met to drink tea & play Cards' at Colonel Shuckburgh's.2 'Madame Shuckborgh Angloise' commissioned a painting from Joseph Vernet for completion in May 1751.3
After spending a year in France Shuttleworth wrote from Rome on 4 June 17041 that he had 'rather spend an evening with some of my old friends in a good English Frock and Bisseter waistcoat than dine with a prince of the blood in the finest suit of clothes and the best powdered toupee in France'; Rome would be insupportable without the English, 'for the natives are so damned formal there is no bearing them'. The opera had been his only diversion during the summer, but now it had been stopped 'by a quarrel between two Ambassadors'. He was conceivably the Shuttleworth who, with George Dashwood and Joseph Addison, met the Duke of Shrewsbury in Florence in November 1701.2

Thomas Shuttleworth, late clerk of the South Sea Company', absconded with Company funds and came to Rome in 1745 'from Holland in 17 days and passed most of his time at Albano under the name of Sir John Smith'. On 14 July 1745 he left Rome for Naples, where he was said to have died the following year.1  There is some confusion over the separate Shuttleworths in Italy. It has been pointed out that Thomas Shuttleworth's character fits that ascribed to Richard Shuttleworth (b. 1709), who is also said to have died in Naples,1 and for whom Lord Middlesex wrote an epitaph: 'And is it true that Shuttleworth's no more? / Why Hell, I thought, had fire enough before'.2
In 1786 Sibthorp made a botanical expedition to Greece. On his outward journey he left Vienna in March 1786 and, passing rapidly through Venice, Bologna, Florence, Siena and Rome, he sailed from Naples on 7 May.1  In 1794 he visited Constantinople and on his return the following year he travelled from Ancona through north Italy and the Tyrol. His journal records brief visits to Padua and Vicenza made from Venice late in June 1795.2 Some of Sibthorp's letters from Italy are in the Hawkins MSS, West Sussex CRO.



A Scotsman from the Gibraltar garrison, he had arrived in Rome with George Hopson by 21 July 1729, and left on his own on 4 September (SP 85/16, ff.563, 584).


Sinclair's surviving journal (Sinclair jnl.MSS) begins in the middle of a description of Rome. He was travelling with a Mr Pell and they both sat to Batoni in Rome for their portraits in miniature, Pell in January 1738 and Sinclair 'sat 2 days' in February. Their cicerone showed them a Virgin Annunciate by Imperiali in Ottoboni's collection, said to have been painted in a week after a wager of 100 gns. with the Cardinal. Sinclair regularly made careful but dull descriptions of monuments and works of art, his style becoming noticeably more relaxed when describing company. He mixed freely with Jacobites, the names of Thomas Dereham, Hay, James Edgar and Dr James Irwin recurring frequently, and he inspected the underground tomb of the Princess Clementina at St Peter's. After enjoying the Carnival ('in the main a silly thing and not a Diversion for reasonable Creature'), Pell hired a chaise for the journey to Naples and they left Rome on 20 February. They spent nine days in Naples, meeting the Duke of Berwick and Sir John Shadwell. They returned briefly to Rome and set out north on 13 March. In Venice they visited Rosalba Carriera's studio and saw 'many of her Portraits, both men and women, several english among them' (5 Apr.). On 8 April they were in Padua, an 'ugly town, streets narrow and ill paved'. Passing through Cremona and Milan they came to Turin where Sinclair borrowed a tye wig in order to be introduced at Court on 24 April.


A portraitist in oil and pastel, he was apprenticed to Francis Bindon in Dublin and later studied in France and Italy. Possibly the Mr Sisson who was commissioned to produce drawings of a machine by Horace Walpole, who called him 'an errant, low, indigent mechanic'.1
A remarkable young scholar, adept in languages and mathematics and something of a poet and amateur artist, Six came to Italy in 1786. Twice before he had been to Switzerland with his friend John Stanley; this time Six crossed the Alps with Tylden and apparently went straight to Naples. 'In ascending Mt Vesuvius he felt his lungs affected by the smoke, and a fever followed which induced him to return to Rome for the advice of ye Duke of Gloucester's Physician, who ordering him some Laudanum in too great a quantity for his Constitution he fell from its Effects into a Lethargy from which he could never be awakened'.1 He died on 14 December 1786 and was buried in the Protestant cemetery in Rome attended by the Duke's chaplain, Mr Walesby.2 In 1787 John Stanley and Oswald Leycester marked the grave with 'a small antique marble altar'1 which had been defaced in 17943 (it is now restored).


Skelton arrived in Rome on 29 December 1757 having sailed from Portsmouth to Leghorn, a voyage not without incident during French hostilities. His nine (monthly) letters from Rome to his patron William Herring (a cousin of Archbishop Herring) afford interesting details of the artist's life.1 His lodgings on the Trinita dei Monte had once been Joseph Vernet's and commanded extensive views; he needed at least £60 a year and, since there was little patronage available, he proposed sending home his drawings for sale 'every 6 or 8 Months'. By the end of June he had sold nothing and he enquired anxiously of Herring whether he had sold any in England. Some of the drawings he brought with him from England had been admired in Florence and Rome, and he had been told that he would find himself 'the best painter in Landscape here', even though there were 'many Young People' then studying landscape in Rome. Skelton worked out of doors and tried to follow his patron's advice - 'to follow Nature strictly'. After three months he had been told he was 'much altered' in his manner; he had then six paintings in hand, one of a wood 'having something new in it' according to his fellow painters. He proposed to copy a Vernet in the Accademia di S.Luca, but he could never obtain access to a Poussin [Gaspard Dughet] or a Claude.  He was distracted in his work by the consequences of his warm friendship with Andrew Lumisden, and it was supposed that Skelton too was a Jacobite, a slander which perplexed him. John, Lord Brudenell, was put off from visiting him in June but, reassured by Nathaniel Dance of Skelton's loyalty, he later called with Henry Lyte and Peter Stephens, pronouncing Skelton's manner 'very like Natures Manner'. Skelton was much excited by Tivoli, 'ye only school where our two most celebrated Landscape Painters Claude and Gasper studied'. He first went there in April and then returned for three months in July to paint 'with a body in Water-colours after Nature', staying in rooms in the Villa d'Este. On his return to Rome, George James said his work was quite free of his master, George Lambert's, manner2 '& he paints Italian fine weather very like & he improves in his taste of composition. the thing he is most wanting in is figures ... he proposes repairing this want by the help of the academy this winter ... the only thing I have to say against Mr Skelton is that he starves himself'.  By the end of November Skelton had completed three large drawings, and at the end of December he was making figure sketches in the Academy and had finished views of the Ponte Molle and of Tivoli. Sir Wyndham Knatchbull-Wyndham and Richard Dalton had called on him, but still he could not sell - 'people seem at present to think of purchasing nothing in the painting way but Portraits, the War makes them very saving of their Mony'. Then suddenly on 19 January Skelton died in Rome after a violent fever. The contents of his studio confirmed what George James then described as his 'miserable way of living for the poor creature absolutely denied himself the necesseries of live' (see George James). On 6 April a case of his pictures addressed to Dr Hay was forwarded fom Leghorn.
He arrived in Venice on 31 July 17801 and was intending to call on the resident John Strange in November.2


Skinner was appointed British consul at Leghorn in 1724 and held the position for ten years. He also acted as chargé d'affaires in Florence in 1731 (while Francis Colman was in Parma) and in 1733-4 (from Colman's death until the arrival of Charles Fane in October 1734).1 Both his father and grandfather had been Italian merchants, and he had first come to Leghorn from Naples.2 He was possibly the Skinner recorded in Naples in 1717 and in 1721.  The first dispatch he received as consul was dated 2 April 1724.3 Horace Mann remembered Skinner as 'the most ridiculous dressing creature I ever saw', who wore his own black hair, 'but on any great occasions he put on a white wig with four tails and a vast deal of powder',4 but he at least proved a loyal government agent, and Lord Essex thought him the most reliable of all the British consuls.5 In 1726 Skinner had reported how the dissensions within the Pretender's court were attracting the disapproval of the Italians; the nobility because they had to yield precedence, the poor because of the financial burden the Stuarts gave to the State, and the middle class because of the reduction of the number of British visitors.6  In August 1732, during the installation of the Rev. John Swinton, the new British chaplain for the merchants at Leghorn, Skinner was said to have been less than enthusiastic - but he allowed services to be celebrated in his own house, and in the same year he protested over the appointment of a British consul at the papal port of Civitavecchia (see Richard Gaven). In August 1733 Skinner applied, unsuccessfully, to succeed Colman as British resident in Florence, also pointing out that he had yet to be paid for maintaining two establishments, at Leghorn and Florence.7 The new British resident, Charles Fane, arrived in Florence in October 1734 and Skinner's last dispatch was dated Leghorn, 1 December 1734.8 He was writing to Lord Essex from London on 22 October 1735, saying he would soon be back in Italy.9


An amateur artist, John Skippe travelled for some years in Italy and Egypt.1 In Italy he acquired some paintings and made a considerable collection of old master drawings, many of which were said to have come from a monastery in Venice. Skippe was not infallible as a collector, but he acquired some important pieces (by Giovanni Bellini and Lorenzo Lotto, for example). His own drawings included some landscapes, but were essentially copies from old masters. He was in Rome from early November 1766 to June 1767,2 and was presumably the 'Tomaso Schiipp gentiluomo Inglese' in Venice on 18 August 1767;3 he was certainly in Venice in September.2 From London on 1 April 1769 'Skippe Gugliemo' accepted honorary membership of the Accademia di S.Luca in Rome.4  Skippe was again in Venice on 30 June 1772, when he inscribed the fly-leaf of one of his notebooks.5 He was then much with Matthew William Peters whose painting technique he admiringly described. Skippe was in Padua sometime in 1773, when he dated the album containing his drawings of the Eremitani frescoes (BMPL). He was sending pictures from Venice to Rome on 3 August and 13 October 1775, some apparently for Thomas Jenkins.5 By December 1775 he was in Alexandria6 and a group of undated drawings confirm his travels in Egypt.5  In April 1778 Anne Pitt was wondering whether Skippe was still in Venice,7 but he was probably back in England by then, 1778 being the earliest date in his list of Pictures painted at Ledbury & elsewhere.5 In 1779 he sold, without much success, a number of old master paintings at Christie's. Skippe made forty chiaroscuro woodcuts from drawings in his collection, which was finally dispersed in 1958 (Christie's 20/1 Nov.). In 1783 he wrote from Overbury to the British resident at Venice, John Strange, saying how he wanted to return 'to a country which of all others I prefer, from one which of all others I most dislike'.8



Mr Skipwith, son of a Bart',1 was, according to the Abbé Grant 'a most sensible and clever man'. He had been in Rome in December 1764, but after 'a very short stay of three weeks' he left for Greece, Constantinople and Asia Minor with Robert Fitzgerald, Dr Turnbull and John[?] Wilbraham. He was determined to be back in Rome by the end of October and to pass the whole of the next winter there.2 He was probably the 'Skipmith' returning home via Portugal, whom Giuseppe Baretti met in Genoa in about May 1766,3 having previously seen him in Venice.
Skirving had been a customs officer before turning to painting and he was thirty-seven when he went to Italy, sponsored by Lord Elcho. He sailed from Leith on 30 November 1786 and arrived in Tuscany after ten weeks; for the next seven years he was based in Rome.1 He was probably the 'Mons.Stirvino' living in the parish of S.Maria del Popolo from 1788 to 1790. In March 1788 Lord Gardenstone met Skirving, 'a young painter of merit [who] comes from the neighbourhood of Edinburgh', and gave him several commissions including a miniature portrait of Gavin Hamilton, copies of 'Corregio's admired picture of the Gamesters, the original in the palace of Fidmar' and his Gipsy as a companion [presumably these were versions of the Caravaggio Cardsharps and Gipsy Fortuneteller] and the purchase of cameos and choice pieces of alum from Tosta. Skirving was to act as his agent and was to take charge of Gardenstone's collection of 'Natural History'.2  In 1790 'Mr Skirving - Crayons - Palazzo del Babuino' was listed among the British artists in Rome (Rome List 1790) and in March 1792 he was described as a 'very ingenious' miniature painter.3 He is said to have copied miniatures from the most celebrated works for the English nobility.4 But according to Sir William Forbes, although he painted 'with considerable merit', he took 'so much time and bestows so much labour in finishing his pieces that he can never do much - indeed can scarcely live by his art'.5 Little of Skirving's Italian work has been identified: there is the pastel of Gavin Hamilton (priv. coll.), a Self-portrait (SNPG), and portraits of Patrick Murray and his tutor, the Rev. Daniel Robertson, and among his well-worked drawings is the charming British Tourists in Rome dated 1792 (formerly in the Oppé coll.).  There are few other glimpses of Skirving. He was probably the 'Sherwin' whose name recurs in Mrs Flaxman's Roman diary in 1791-2 and who began John Flaxman's portrait on 16 October 1791.6 Sir William Forbes met Lusieri in Naples in March 1793 through an introduction from Skirving.7 On 5 March 1794 Skirving described to George Cumberland some of the antics of the 4th Earl of Bristol,8 and in April he signed (as 'Archibald Skerving') the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus from the English artists in Rome (Rome List 1794). Skirving left Rome on 22 May 1794, but on 4 August he was taken prisoner at sea off Gibraltar by the French and imprisoned in Brest; there he remained for over a year and he returned home a sick man, having developed a serious eye complaint.1 On hearing of his arrest in September 1794 James Smith and Duvivier in Venice had told Cacault, the French chargé d'affaires in Italy, that 'cest artiste nous a toujours manifesté à Rome l'amour la plus grande pour la Révolution françoise'.9
Skrine left England in June 1749 with Augustus Hervey, but they separated in Paris. In April 1750 Skrine was in Florence cutting a considerable figure, according to Horace Mann; 'he has the finest clothes, always wears lace, has a fine equipage, and gives great dinners'.1 Skrine returned to Italy after his marriage to Jane Sumner. Her reputation having been tarnished by her friendships with Kitty Fisher and the 4th Earl of Sandwich, they decided to live abroad, but Mrs Skrine died in Rome in February 1766.2
A man 'of very independent fortune', Slade travelled for two years in Great Britain before setting out for Italy in June 1774. He went 'through France, Switzerland, Italy, visited Malta, and Sicily, and reached Venice without purchasing a single picture', but then, as he described it, 'instead of spending two or three weeks at Venice according to my original intention, I became incantenato, and cavaliere servente to a certain Contessa of the first consideration, and I remained in that fascinating city for nearly two years'.1 In that time he acquired the Vitturi collection jointly with the British chargé d'affaires John Udny, whose credit subsequently failed, enabling Slade to take the whole. Apart from these outstanding pictures Slade also acquired medals, gems, intaglios and cameos from Vitturi, a collection of prints and drawings from Count Durazzo (the Imperial ambassador at Venice), and a 'Bird's Eye View of all Venice', by Guardi (closely derived from an engraving by Furlanetto) which Slade himself had commissioned.2 He was able to enjoy his acquisitions for a year in Venice before being called home on the outbreak of the American wars. His cargo of pictures was sent from Venice in 1777, but he also left there a number of large pictures which he had bought with Udny in Ferrara for resale.3 Slade visited Rome, Naples and Sicily before returning home.3 He was probably the Mr Slade seen in Naples by Sir William Hamilton in January 1778,4 and Thomas Jones saw him in Rome in April 1778,5 when he was sharing lodgings with Henry Tresham on the Corso 'verso Babuino'.6
When Slaney was about to set out on his grand tour in May 1782 Martin Sherlock gave him some advice on travel in Italy.1 Slaney was in Rome by December 1782, and he spent much time with the Ramsays, father and son, and a Hamilton (possibly H.D. Hamilton) with whom he returned to Rome from Naples on 2 April 1783.2




On 2 December 1802 James Irvine in Rome reported that 'Mr Sloane the banker here' was 'lately dead'.1 Sloane's collection, which included a Salvator Rosa, Mercury and Argus (Kansas City) two Claudes, Landscape with Christ appearing to Mary Magdalene (Frankfurt) and David at the Cave of Adullam (NG London), and a Guido Reni Madonna from the Falconieri collection, was being dispersed by his widow and son-presumably the Alexander Sloane living in the parish of S.Andrea delle Fratte in Rome who exported pictures and marbles from Rome between 26 March 1802 and 14 June 1804.3 Robert Sloane was conceivably the 'sig Slonne' who called on Pacetti in Rome on 7 April 1800 and 30 March 1801, on both occasions to discuss the Apotheosis of Homer, the classical relief.4




Smibert was already established as a portrait painter in Scotland when he set out from Leith for Italy on 1 August 1719.1 He went through France and, having crossed the Alps, sailed from Genoa to Leghorn, where he passed five days. He then spent almost a year in Florence, in the course of which he studied in the Grand Duke's galleries, copying Raphael, Rubens and Titian. His copies of portraits by van Dyck and Tintoretto survive (Fogg AM and Bowdoin Coll. MA). His application was noticed by the Florentine antiquary Niccolo Gabburri who in his manuscript Le Vite de'pittori observed that Smibert 'drew the best statues and copied many of the best paintings from the Royal Gallery of Tuscany'. Smibert also made extensive acquisitions of works by essentially near-contemporary Florentine masters; between 1 February and 28 October 1720 he bought fifty paintings and 250 drawings, as well as examples of semi-precious stone boxes and pietre dure. That summer Smibert met George Berkeley (then travelling with St George Ashe), and the two became close friends, ultimately going together to America. Smibert painted portraits of both Berkeley (priv. coll.) and St George Ashe (untraced). He came to Rome on 12 November 1720 and painted several portraits, of which two survive although the sitters are not identified (Wadsworth Atheneum and Montclair AM). He also copied portraits of the Pretender and his wife for Sir Andrew Cockburn in London.2 On 24 April 1721 'Smybert a Scotsman and Painter', witnessed the marriage of Andrew Hay's sister by the Rev. G. Barclay (the Pretender's Church of Scotland chaplain), and on 15 June 'Mr John Smybert painter a Scotsman' left Rome for Leghorn.3 There he received further (unspecified) commissions. In December he was again in Rome delivering paintings and receiving final payments before going back to Leghorn. His travel notebook ends in December, but Smibert was recorded on his journey home in Padua on 6 May 1722. Two days later he left for Venice and then on the 22nd he returned to Padua, on each occasion accompanied by a Mr Tomson and a Mr Trotter (the latter probably Andrew Hay's brother-in-law).4 He was back in London by the summer of 1722. According to Vertue, Smibert had also visited Naples in the course of his Italian visit.5
Smith, an American connoisseur and collector, was travelling in Europe between 1793 and 1807. He went to Italy from England with Lord Wycombe.1 'Smith Allen Americano Cavaliere' was in Venice on 19 June 1793, and again from 28 May to 7 June 1794.2 He was probably Smith, the 'ennuyeux' American, who went with Lady Webster from Rome to Naples in March 1796 (but see James Smith, the American painter). In Florence he was a discerning patron of Fabre, from whom he commissioned five paintings, including two portraits, one life size 'au milieu des ruines de l'ancienne Rome'.3 A small whole-length by Fabre, dated Florence 1797, showing Smith seated in front of a view of Florence is in the Fitzwilliam Museum and a sketch is in Montpellier; drawings for two of the history pieces commissioned by Smith, Ajax dragging Cassandra from the altar of Minerva and Helen pleading with Menelaus are repectively in the Uffizi and the Louvre.4 In March 1799 Fabre was still working for Smith with whom he had lost touch ('il y a bien des mois que je n'ai pas de ses nouvelles').4 In August Fabre told Lord Holland 'quant à la composition du tableau de M. Smith, vous devinez parfaitment juste: l'honneur de la composition est tout à lui. J'ai tout au plus le mérite de l'éxecution' (probably referring to the portrait).5 In December 1796 Smith had consigned from Rome to Civitavecchia a large collection of works of art, deliberately compiled to 'to be of some service to his countrymen when they should turn their thoughts to the study of Painting & Sculpture', but by November 1797 he learned it had been taken by the French - '13 cases of valuable paintings, near 3000 gems, some valuable statues, real antiques, & some copies, which he had himself superintended, of the most renowned statues of Rome, Florence, & Naples, of colossal size'. The collection was eventually recovered and installed at Philadelphia, where only four of his pictures are identifiable today in the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts (by Guido Reni, Schidone and attributed to Salvator Rosa).  Smith was in Ireland by November 1797, France in 1801 and Russia 1802-5, returning to America in 1807.

Alvo' [James Alves]; AVR SA, S.Maria del Popolo)

An improvident parson, he accompanied Allan Ramsay and Alexander Cunyngham on their stormy journey by felucca from Genoa to Leghorn in September 1736. In April 1737 he borrowed money from Ramsay in Rome which he could not repay within the month originally agreed, and he borrowed a further £150 from another Englishman before leaving Rome for Siena. On 19 August Smith wrote to Ramsay from Siena (where he had taken into his house 'a young Abbé who in truth reads till he stupifies me') apparently settling his debt and giving a forwarding address in Paris (Scots Charta Chest, 105-7, 133-5).
In 1774 Mr and Mrs Patrick Home lodged in Rome with Mrs Smith.1 In 1776 the French artist Ducros stayed in Rome in a pensione on the Strada della Croce run by Catarina Smith, the widow of an English artist.2 Goethe refered to a French artist leaving a drawing to his landlady, who has also been identified as Mrs Smith.3 Catherine Smith's will (archivio Capitolina) is dated 1 April 1785.




In 1763 Francis Smith had travelled in the East with the 6th Baron Baltimore. He painted a number of topographical views of Naples (some of which are at Apsley House), closely comparable with the works of Antonio Joli. He exhibited a Vesuvius in London in 1768, by which time he may have settled in London (Grant, 2:162).

George Smith arrived in Venice from Rome in August 1731, affecting to pass for a great Virtuoso. 'He saies he's of the Bishoprick of Durham', wrote Elizeus Burges, 'and has been out of England about eighteen months and twelve of 'em in Italy'; he intended to return to Rome the following winter.1 He was doubtless the 'Smy inglese' who had been living in the Strada Felice in Rome at Easter 1731, and the Smith living on the Strada Gregoriana in 1733.2 In 1733 P.L. Ghezzi drew a caricature of 'Cav.Smith Inglese uomo assai erudito e amantissimo delle antichita ... il quale ha girato tutto il mondo per vedere le cose belle' (Vatican Library).
He was secretary to William Hamilton at Naples and chargé d'affaires in 1777 and 1791 during Hamilton's absences.1 He was said to have been born in The Hague and to have been with Clive in India before joining Hamilton.2

Smith of Parma' spent some twenty years in Italy in the course of three or four visits, during which he was principally engaged as a copyist. He may have been the 'James Smith, portrait painter' who arrived in Rome in 1767,1 but he is otherwise first recorded in Rome at Easter 1774 living by the Via Babuino ('Giacomo Smit Inglese Protestante Pittore -24') and he was listed at the same address in 1775 and 1776.2 In June 1775 he was completing three copies for Patrick Home: Guido Reni's Fortune and Guercino's Persian Sybil from the Capitol and Caravaggio's Gamesters from the Palazzo Barberini.3 James Smith was given official permission to copy Correggio's S.Jerome in the gallery at Parma on 23 September 1776.4 He wrote to Ozias Humphry concerning his progress on 19 November,5 and the following year Patrick Home saw him with his full-size copy in May, 'succeeding tolerably'.2 On 14 November 1776 Thomas Jones had met in Parma 'Mr Smith an Artist and Native of N. America, whom I afterwards knew in Rome by the name of Smith of Parma to distinguish him from others of the same name'.6 Two copies by Mr Smith, almost certainly James Smith, made in Italy in 1777 for Henry Blundell (Raphael's Madonna delle sedia and Correggio's Madonna with S.Catherine) were sold in 1991 (Christie's, 19 Apr.). He was in Florence in October 1777 copying Correggio's Madonna in the Uffizi, and he was again copying there in August 1778 (Michaelangelo's Self portrait).7 On 31 May 1780 Jones said Smith left Rome for England.8 In October 1781 Smith was once more copying in the Uffizi (Raphael prints) and again in November 1787 (Titian, Venus of Urbino).9  Thomas Jones said that Smith later returned to Rome,6 and he was doubtless the 'Giacomo Smith Inglese Pitte.' (whose age was given as 40 in 1789) living in Rome in the Strada Felice with the architect Samuel Bunce in 1789-91 and with the architect William Theed in 1792.10 'Smith History Painter' was listed on the Trinità de'Monte in 1790 and 1793 (Rome Lists), but there was also an English painter Charles Smith living in Rome at Easter 1790 (see above). 'Smith', evidently an artist, was mentioned in Rome by James Irvine in April 1791 as dining with and ridiculing Guy Head,11 and 'Smith' is mentioned in Mrs Flaxman's Diary in February and March 1791.12  On 15 September 1794, 'James Smith, peintre, citoyen de l'Amérique septentrionale' signed (with Duvivier) a letter from Venice addressed to Cacault, the French Republican chargé d'affaires in Italy, seeking the release of Archibald Skirving, whom the French had captured at sea (see Skirving). In September 1794 Smith had also been in Florence, said to be about to return to America, but he was again in Florence in 1796-7, copying Flemish paintings.13 He was possibly the Smith, 'the American, an ennuyeux', who went from Rome to Naples with Lady Webster in March 1796,14 though this could equally have been Allen Smith.
In 1793 Smith published his Sketch of a Tour on the Continent, in the years 1786 and 1787, dedicated to Dr William Young, his travelling companion. It is an observant and enlightened journal (with a bibliography of travel guides to Italy), in which the author's particular interests in botany and natural science are mixed with a tourist's curiosity concerning works of art and foreign customs. A non-conformist, he tolerated popery, reflecting that it would be better if 'differences of religion were less thought of, than those sources of improvement and consolation to which all modes of faith, in common, direct us, though each by a different route'.  They had left England in June 1786 and arrived in Genoa from Nice in December. They stayed three weeks at the Gran Cervo, meeting the 'ingenious English physician' Dr William Batt, their banker Joseph Brame, and Smith's friend the Marquis Hippolito Durazzo. At Pisa they hired the vetturino Diego Baroncello, who was to accompany them most of their way through Italy, and they reached Vannini's hotel in Florence on 24 January 1787. The physician Tozzetti showed them the natural history collection he had inherited from Micheli, and in the Uffizi Smith noticed that Reynolds's self-portrait had 'faded to nothing, and being placed very low, appears to greater disadvantage'. In Siena they met the anatomist Mascagni and his dissector Semenzi (to whom Batt had provided an introduction). They reached Rome on 7 February and stayed at Pio's hotel on the Piazza di Spagna. Resolved to devote their time to the study of art and architecture, they dispensed with letters of introduction. The Abbé Correa de Serra, a Portuguese acquaintance of Smith's, became their cicerone, and they stayed through the Carnival, regularly seeing the decrepit Young Pretender driving in the Corso 'lolling in his coach'.  On 25 February they left Rome for Naples where they stayed at the Albergo Francese, near the Molo. Sir William Hamilton, 'a man of science' as well as diplomat, showed them his elegant rooms with sash windows in Naples and at Caserta, where they were also able to meet Goethe, 'a polite unassuming man', to hear 'some charming unpublished quartettos of Giardini's', and to see the English garden growing under the care of John Graefer. They returned to Rome for Holy Week. As Pio's hotel was now occupied by the Duke of Gloucester, they stayed in a mercer's house in the Strada Condotta. Smith admired the bearing of the Pope 'in all the ceremonies'; he was struck by the dramatic Easter service in the Sistine Chapel, while the firework display on Easter Monday reminded him of 'the excellent pictures' of Joseph Wright of Derby. From Rome they went to spend three days in Bologna, where Guido Reni's St Peter in the Sampieri collection held their attention.  In Venice Smith considered St Mark's to be 'the most dirty place of public worship in Europe', and in the Square one trod on rotten fish from the adjoining market. In Padua they met Arduino, a former professor of botany, and Dr Gallini, professor of the theory of medicine. They visited Bodoni's press in Parma and went on to meet the Astronomer Royal, the Abbé Oriani, in Milan. On 15 June they reached Pavia, 'the most celebrated university in Italy, and perhaps better furnished with able professors, men of real genius and activity, than most at present existing in the world'. They attended a lecture by Spallanzani, professor of natural history, but it was there that Young left Smith, called home by 'unavoidable engagements'. Smith went on alone to Genoa and Turin, whence he made an expedition to Mont Cenis with a small party which included a mineralogist, Dr Buonvicino, and a natural philosopher, the Abbé Vasco. Smith left Italy at the end of August 1787 and sailed to Dover from Boulogne on 2 November.
Smith was sent to Italy by the 2nd Earl of Warwick (previously George, Lord Grenville), himself an amateur draughtsman, and stayed for five years. His Italian sojourn coincided with those of William Pars, Francis Towne and Thomas Jones, whose Memoirs provide some account of Smith's activities.1 Farington recorded that Smith went to Italy in 1776,2 but Jones first met him in Rome on 13 January 1778 when Smith was much in the company of the architects Thomas Hardwick and John Henderson and had a house 'about two miles without the Porte Pia'.  On 22 March 1778 Smith left Rome for Naples (accompanied by a Captain Wood who soon returned to Rome). Smith spent the next sixteen months based in Naples, making frequent excursions. In May, with Hardwick, he visited Portici, Pozzuoli and the islands of Nisida and Capri.3 From mid-September to 17 October Smith was staying at Vietri in a house on a hill, to which he returned the following year; a watercolour of it is inscribed: 'My Residence for two successive summers'.4 On 17 October Thomas Jones met Stephen Storace, Cobley (an Irish merchant in Naples) and Smith returning from Vietri, and later that month Smith and Jones sketched at Capo di Monte (20 October). Storace and Giuseppe Plura were with them at Portici and Vesuvius (29 October), and Cobley joined them on a visit to Pozzuoli (14 November); Smith and Cobley were at Sorrento with Jones and Storace on 17 November. On 1 December Smith and Jones shared lodgings at the Gennaro di Napoli near the Arsenal. Jones, who was taken ill there, commented that Smith 'came home so late in the Evening & went out so early in the Morning' that he had to tend for himself.  Jones left for Rome on 23 January 1779 and Smith arrived back on 15 July, having resided in Naples 'ever since March last twelvemonth'. He took apartments near the Trinita dei Monti at the Monaco which also housed a musical academy and had 'a delightful Loggia or Open Gallery' on the roof 'where', wrote Jones, 'we spent many agreable Evenings with Song and Dance &c'. Smith celebrated Christmas Day 1779 with Jones, Durno, Pars, Alexander Day and a Mr Mitchel. He marked St David's Day, 1 March 1780, by dining with Jones. At Easter 1780 'Giovanni Smit Inglese Pittore' aged 30 was living at the Casa Costanzi in the Via Babuino,5 and he appears to have stayed on until August 1781 when he left Rome with Francis Towne to travel home through Switzerland (Towne's Alpine views are dated August and September 1781, see Towne). Smith continued to work up his Italian material after his return to England and there are dated Italian views up to 1796. Select Views in Italy, published in London between 1792 and 1799, contained 72 plates engraved after Smith, including views of Bologna, Florence, Perugia, Assisi, Genoa, Paestum and Loreto. Many of Smith's Italian watercolours were sold by Lord Warwick's descendants in 1936 (Sotheby's, 17 Jun.).
Unusual, colourful, gifted but not altogether sympathetic', Joseph Smith passed some seventy years in Venice where he practised as a merchant banker and for some years acted as British consul. His reputation, however, was principally founded on his remarkable (and profitable) activity as a virtuoso and patron of the arts.1 After attending Westminster school in London he went to Venice c.1700 to work with Thomas Williams, a merchant banker, whom he succeeded as manager in 1720. Williams & Smith, an international firm of repute, dealt extensively with the import of meat and fish from Amsterdam; as bankers their activities ranged from handling the subsidy from the maritime powers to Prince Eugene in 1705, to acting as agents for British visitors in Venice.  Smith lived in a small palazzo (now the Mangilli-Valmarana) near SS.Apostoli on the Grand Canal north of the Rialto, initially leased by Williams from the Balbi family, then bought outright by Smith in 1740 and extensively rebuilt. Smith had also bought in 1731 a small estate at Mogliano on the Venetian mainland. Antonio Visentini, Smith's artistic factotum, acted as his architect for both properties. Smith was twice married, firstly to the opera singer Catherine Tofts, by whom he had an only child, John (1721-7); following her death in 1755, he renounced his courtship of the youthful Giustiniana Wynne, and at the age of seventy-six married the British resident's daughter, Elizabeth Murray, in 1757. After many years of coveting public office, Smith was made consul in June 1744, a position he resigned in 1760, when he said he was going to tour Italy and return to England.2 But it appears he travelled little in Italy and never saw Rome; in 1766 (when he was well over eighty) Smith acted as chargé d'affaires in Venice following the departure of the resident John Murray and until the arrival of his successor Sir James Wright.  Smith's collecting grew inevitably out of his banking activities and the element of business became indistinguishable from patronage. In the 1710s he was buying manuscripts and books, probably inspired by the remarkable purchases being made in this field in Italy by his client Thomas Coke of Holkham. Printed catalogues of Smith's library, aimed at attracting purchasers, appeared in 1720 (121 manuscripts, bought by the 3rd Earl of Sunderland), 1722 (101 manuscripts), and 1724 (227 incunabula; a second edition in 1737), to culminate in the Bibliotheca Smithiana (which also described his vast collection of drawings) of 1755. It was in his celebrated library that Smith's interest in antiquity was principally displayed. From the early 1730s he financed and directed the Pasquali Press, named after his literary collaborator G.B. Pasquali, a classical scholar, with Visentini the principal designer. The Press published a wide range of scholarly books, including a facsimile Palladio. Attached to it was a bookshop, La Felicita delle Lettere, which became a meeting place for scholars of the Enlightenment. Smith was far more than a sponsor for the Press; it was largely through his exertions, for example, that Guicciardini's Istoria d'Italia was published in 1738, and his enjoyment of literature was acknowledged by Goldoni who dedicated to him his play Il Filosofo Inglese [1754]. Smith was a keen theatre-goer and regularly attended the opera and in 1734 he was acting as Farinelli's agent.3  The most prominent part of Smith's collections was soon to be contemporary paintings, particularly by Venetian artists. In the 1720s he had acquired (perhaps commissioned)4 seven large Biblical subjects from Sebastiano and Marco Ricci. Rosalba Carriera (whose godfather was Smith's lawyer) received regular payments from Smith in 1725-8 (some perhaps on behalf of clients) and he eventually owned 38 works by her, including the Self portrait which she gave him in her old age. By 1730 Smith was apparently acting as the young Canaletto's agent; in 1735 Visentini engraved twenty Canalettos from Smith's collection, fourteen of which illustrated the topography of the Grand Canal (the Prospectus Magni Canalis Venetiarum). Nearly twenty years later Canaletto added in the rebuilt façade of Smith's palazzo in his View of the Grand Canal to the north of the Rialto. In September 1734 Smith assured Lord Essex that he had made Canaletto 'sett aside some other works' in order to 'finish the four pieces [Lady Essex] commission'd me to procure for her'.5 Canaletto painted comparable series for the 4th Earl of Carlisle and the 4th Duke of Bedford but, when war reduced his British clientele in 1742, Canaletto again worked for Smith. Six large views of ancient Roman monuments were followed by thirteen overdoors illustrating Palladian buildings in Venice and, shortly before he left for England in 1746, Canaletto dedicated to Smith a series of 31 etchings, altre prese da i Luoghi altre ideate. Zuccarelli and Visentini then continued the series of overdoors with eleven views of English Palladian buildings. Smith also owned paintings (now lost) and drawings by Piazetta, but he neglected G.B. Tiepolo. Smith acquired old masters, though few of the purchases are documented. They included Bellini's Agony in the Garden (which Smith knew as a Mantegna) and Rembrandt's Descent from the Cross (both NG London). In 1741 he had sold a number of (unidentified) paintings to the Elector of Saxony, and at the same time he bought a collection of Dutch and Flemish pictures from Pellegrini's widow, amongst which (almost certainly) was Smith's Vermeer (then called Frans van Mieris), The Lady at the Virginals. In 1752 he bought more old masters from the heirs of Zaccaria Sagredo, including a fine Bellini portrait and several volumes of drawings (over 200 by G.B. Castiglione), and many by the Carracci family and Raphael. Smith's collection of drawings included many by Marco and Sebastiano Ricci and Canaletto. There were further aspects to Smith's remarkable collections. He owned some bronzes, and he took pride in his selection of gems and cameos - as he described to the Florentine antiquary, A.F. Gori who compiled the Dactyliotheca Smithiana, completed in 1767. There was also a collection of coins and medals which, with his cameos and some jewels, was deposited in 1761 with Santino Cambiaso as surety against a debt.  Soon after the publication of the Bibliotheca Smithiana in 1755, Smith considered the sale of his library to 'a Royal Purchaser'. The War of the Austrian Succession (1740-8) had harmed his finances, but then the outbreak of the Seven Years War (1756-63) aggravated his position. In 1760, when he was over eighty years old and recently remarried, Smith was described as 'devilishly poor'; he 'ought to sell', said James Adam, 'if vanity would allow him, but he is literally eaten up with it'.6 In 1761 he sold the stock and contents of the bookshop. He made a will on 5 May 1761, leaving his collections to his wife (and amongst his small bequests, a portrait of the Doge Cornaro by Uberti to John Udny, then his business partner and successor as British consul). But the will was overtaken by events. In 1760, on George III's accession, the sale of Smith's collection to a royal patron was reconsidered. James Stuart Mackenzie (who had been British envoy in Turin), negotiated the purchase, not only of the contents of the Bibliotheca Smithiana, but of paintings and gems, coins and medals, for £20,000 (see also Richard Dalton), and early in 1763 Smith's collection arrived by sea in London (at the same time as Cardinal Albani's collection of drawings, also bought by George III).  It appears, however, that not everything was sold, and that Smith did not renounce collecting. When he died in 1770 several hundred paintings and drawings remained in his possession. In June 1773 Patrick Home bought several pictures from Mrs Smith in Venice (see Home), and others were acquired by her friend John Strange. The majority, however, were sold, with some sculpture, at Christie's in 1776 (22 Apr., 16 May). Many books were described in two posthumous catalogues (Venice 1771 and London, Baker & Leigh, 25 Jan. 1773). A collection of coins was bought from Smith's widow by William Hunter in 1777. Other items from Smith's collections appeared in Dalton's sale, (Christie's, 11 Apr. 1791), while Bellini's Agony in the Garden was one of several Smith paintings in Joshua Reynolds's sale (Christie's, 13 Mar. 1795). Some plate and jewels were sold in 1789 (Christie's, 9 Apr. 1789) after Mrs Smith's death. The Smith collection bought by George III remains in the Royal Collection, except for the books and illuminated manuscripts which were transferred to the British Museum in 1823.
Luigi Smiz Inglese Nobile', also described as negoziante and mercante, was recorded at Venice from July to October 1793, and he returned to Venice from England in May 1794. On 7 June 1794 he left, it was stated, for Rome, but two weeks later he arrived back in Venice from Milan. He was last recorded in Venice on 6 December: 'Mr Smith Inglese Negoziante trasportato all'Ascensione'[?] (ASV is 768, 769, 770, 771, 772).





Samuel Smith, his wife and his brother Charles were in Italy in 1788. T.C. Porter met them in Venice, dined with them in Bologna on 23 May and saw them again in Milan in June.1 They were presumably the 'three Smyths' seen in Rome on 30 December 1787.2
Mr Speakers Sonne arrived here last Tuesday', wrote consul Broughton from Venice on 15 October 1706, accompanied by the 7th Earl of Dorset and Richard Lumley (son of the 1st Earl of Scarbrough).1 'Tomaso Smit Inglese' was living by the Strada Croce in Rome at Easter 1707.2
Thomas Smith merchant of Thames Street, London' was in touch with Jacobites in Rome in November 1723. He left Rome in November 1724 with a Mr Lee (a paid adherent of the Pretender) and though he had openly consorted with Jacobites, he was 'incapable of intriguing against any Government'.1 He may have been the 'Tomaso Imit Luterano' living by the Strada Vittoria in Rome at Easter 1724.2 After staying in Paris he returned to Rome in February 1726 with a Mr Stopford, a Mr Graham and 'Coftus'[?].3
An album of drawings inscribed Sketches in Italy and Switzerland by Thomas Smith 1795 contains views of Pisa, Florence, Siena, Rome and Naples; only one is dated, a view from the island of Procida of 1780.1  He was possibly the Mr Smith who was the artist Henry Thomson's friend and companion in Rome in 1795.2
Educated and ordained in Naples, he retired to Florence c.1771 and subsequently lived in Rome, where he died on 13 April 1776. He was buried by the Abbé Stonor, his executor, at SS. Quirico e Giulitta (Kirk). He was probably the 'old English Missioner Mr Smith' living in Rome above Father Thorpe, who wrote on 6 April 1776 that Smith 'was very infirm, has plenty of money but no true friends. He complains of being neglected by Mr Stonor, the only person he knew in this city' (Thorpe letters MSS).

On 11 July 1733 John Bagshaw reported from Genoa that 'Mr Smith a Gentleman lately come from England has abjured his Religion he pretends to have had great Losses by the Charitable Corporation'.1 He was doubtless the clergyman Smith who had changed his religion and was in Rome with his wife in October-November 1733; Martin Folkes thought him 'imprudent' and his conversation 'shocking even to good manners'.2 In March 1734 Stosch reported 'on a fait partir de Rome le nommé Smith avec sa Femme, le meme qui s'imaginoit y faire grande fortune sous les Auspices de la Conversion; il est passé par Civita Vechia à Gênes en fort pauvre Etat'.3

Hugh Smithson was in Italy with his tutor Benjamin Crowe in 1733-4. They arrived in Florence in mid-March 1733,1 and were in Venice towards the end of May for Ascension.2 In June they were back in Florence, proposing to spend some time there.3 In November they came to Rome with William Dugood, the jeweller. On the 12th they dined at William Holbech's with Martin Folkes and others4 and they were still in Rome in March 1734. In June they were in Vicenza to hear Farinelli sing, and they had observed the French army near Mantua while they were staying in Milan.5 Smithson was back in England in 1736 when he was elected fellow of the Royal Society and of the Society of Antiquaries, and he was made a founder member of the Society of Dilettanti. His discriminating patronage of Canaletto probably started during his visit to Italy, but his assistance of Giles Hussey must have been made from England. In November 1773 the Duke of Northumberland (as Smithson had become) and his Duchess were in Milan.6

Smollett's Travels through France and Italy [1766] recounts his experiences abroad in a series of 41 letters, of which eight concern Italy.1 Their content is garrulous and entertainingly philistine. Smollett and his wife were not in the best frame of mind when they set out from Dover in June 1763; their only child had just died, Smollett was suffering from the onset of consumption and The Briton, the periodical he was editing, had folded. Middle-aged, Smollett scorned the orthodox grand tourists, 'raw boys, whom Britain seemed to have poured forth on purpose to bring her national character into contempt' [XXIX; letter nos. in Smollett's Travels].  He and his wife settled in Nice for a year before spending two months in Italy from the beginning of September 1764. They sailed to Genoa and Lerici with Anne Curry (for whom Mrs Smollett was acting as chaperone) and a 'Mr R.' of Nice. They travelled overland to Pisa and Florence and by the end of September they were in Rome where they stayed several weeks before returning to Florence and back to Nice. The Travels supply much classical history and description, but it is relieved by original perceptions of works of art. Having proclaimed that he was no connoisseur, Smollett did not hesitate to say he found no beauty in the Venus de Medici whose attitude was 'aukward and out of character' [XXVIII] and Michelangelo's Last Judgment produced 'the same sort of confusion that perplexes my ear at a grand concert, consisting of a great variety of instruments: or rather, when a number of people are all talking at once' [XXXIII]. Raphael's Transfiguration he would cut in two [XXXIII]. Modern architecture failed to please. The churches and palaces were too crowded with petty ornaments and 'such an assemblage of useless festoons, pillars, pilasters and their architrave entablatures' [XXX]. While St Peter's Square was altogether sublime, Bernini's Baldacchino magnificent, and the symmetry and proportion of St Peter's 'so worthy of applause', the altar of St Peter's choir was 'a heap of puerile finery, better adapted to an Indian Pagod, than to a temple built upon the principles of Greek architecture'[XXXI]. The Colosseum was the most stupendous work of its kind, but the Pantheon looked like 'a huge cockpit, open at the top' [XXXI]. He viewed painting with a strong Protestant prejudice, and regretted that so many pictures were devoted to the 'shocking subjects of the martyrology', such as 'Laurence frying upon the coals' (whom he referred to with equal disrespect in another context as being 'broiled like a barbecued pig') [XXXI].  His comments on the Italian people were not unduly flattering; he thought Italian women 'the most haughty, insolent, capricious and revengeful females on the face of the earth', and he would rather 'be condemned for life to the gallies, than exercise the office of cicisbeo' [XXVII]; 'the hostlers, postilions, and other fellows hanging about the post-houses in Italy, are the most greedy, impertinent, and provoking' [XXIX]. Smollett warned young travellers in Rome 'to be upon their guard against a set of sharpers (some of them of our own country) who deal in pictures and antiques'; it was odd that 'the moment [the English] set foot in Italy, they are seized with the ambition of becoming connoisseurs in painting, musick, statuary, and architecture' and the adventurers of this country 'do not fail to flatter this weakness for their own advantage' [XXIX]. He described the social ritual of the English in Rome: on arrival 'you receive cards from all your country folks' who 'expect to have the visit returned the next day, when they give orders not to be at home; and you never speak to one another in the sequel' [XXIX]. At the end of his Italian expedition Smollett recalled how he had suffered a 'great number of hardships, which I thought my weakened constitution could not have bore; as well as to violent fits of passion, chequered, however, with transports of a more agreeable nature; insomuch that I may say I was for two months continually agitated either in mind of body, and very often in both at the same time' [XXXV]. A subsequent visit overland from Nice to Turin in February/March 1765, described in letter XXXVIII, is now considered a fiction.  Smollett's health did not improve and he and his wife again set out for Italy in 1769, to seek a cure at the baths of Lucca and Pisa. On 5 June 1769 Smollett witnessed the marriage of Anne Curry to George Renner in Florence.2 In February 1770 Horace Mann was consulting him in Pisa over the identity of Junius.3 In the spring of 1770 he hired a villa, 'Il Giardino', just outside Leghorn in 'a most romantic and solitary Situation', where Dr John Armstrong visited him in May.4 In the autumn he wrote most of Humphry Clinker, perhaps his greatest novel. In January 1771 he described himself as 'so dry and emaciated that I may pass for an Egyptian mummy',5 and in August he was at the baths in Lucca and Pisa.6 He died on 17 September and was buried in the Protestant cemetery in Leghorn (where his monument was erected in 1773).7 He had sat for his portrait to an unknown Italian painter (NPG) and an anonymous miniature (priv. coll.) once belonged to George Renner, who subsequently acted as Smollett's agent in Leghorn. His widow, whose health was also delicate, stayed on in Italy living with the Renners in Leghorn; her circumstances were not comfortable and she lost her estate in the West Indies through a fire in 1782.8 She died in Leghorn on 30 January 1791 (and lies buried in the same grave as Mrs Renner).9 George Renner had died in 1790.
Smyth went abroad for his health in 1732. He arrived in Florence in October 1732, having travelled specially from Paris to see his friend Joseph Spence; they were still together there in December.1 His advice to a traveller in Italy (written c.1740 and principally financial) is in the Spence papers.2  For his second tour, see Hartington; Smyth's rapid promotion in the church in Ireland was due to Devonshire patronage.

On 5 December 1767 Hervey Smyth received a letter of introduction from the British resident in Venice, James Wright, to Horace Mann in Florence (SP 105/318, f.171).

He sat to Batoni in Rome in 1773 (Sotheby's, 12 Jul. 1995; Clark/Bowron 363).
Sir Robert and Lady Smyth passed through Milan at the beginning of November 1777.1 They were in Naples early in March 1778, Henry Swinburne commenting that Lady 'Smith' was the prettiest English person there.2 By 25 March they had reached Rome, Mrs Frederick Hervey then calling Lady Smyth 'a pretty sensible young woman'.3 They visited Thomas Jones's studio in April,4 and in September, on their way home, they were joined in Bologna by Fuseli.5 Piranesi dedicated to Sir Robert a plate in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778].

A Catholic, he was travelling in Italy with 'Stouard', a Scot [Sir William Stuart?], with whom he shared a French governor. Stosch said the two had just arrived in Rome in June 1740.1 In March 1741 Lady Pomfret wrote that 'Smith' was to leave Rome at the end of that month.2 In June Joseph Spence met in Venice a Mr Smith with Sir William Stuart.3
After receiving part of his education at Douai, Smythe spent some time at the Turin Academy and made a tour of Italy; he left Rome with a Mr Orton in the summer of 1780 (Kirk. Thorpe letters MSS, c.25 Jun. 1780*).

Miss Snow, who was so fat she was called 'Double Stout', entertained the King of Naples 'prodigiously' with her 'furious' dancing with a Mr Spence (Swinburne, Courts, 1:149).
The contents of the Soane Museum perfectly illustrate Soane's statement: 'I was sent to Italy to pursue my studies ... This was the most fortunate event of my life, for it was the means by which I formed those connections to which I owe all the advantages I have since enjoyed'.1 Drawings, annotated guide books, pocket vade-mecums stuffed with sketches and field notes, passports, diplomas from foreign academies, and letters received, are preserved as mementos of what he nostalgically called 'the gay morning of youth' (cf.RA 1820, no.894). Soane's awareness of the advantages of foreign travel undoubtedly derived from his early employer George Dance, at whose urging Soane entered the RA (25 October 1771). In 1777 he won the Royal Travelling Scholarship to Rome, due in part to the support of William Chambers. In company with his classmate R.F. Brettingham, Soane set off in 1778, supplied with a letter of recommendation from Chambers to Piranesi (the letter, in the Soane Museum, was later inscribed by Soane: 'A most valuable Treasure to the young Student in Architecture').  On 1 August 1778 Soane wrote from Rome: 'I need not tell you my attention is entirely taken up in seeing & examining the numerous & inestimable remains of Antiquity as you are no stranger to the zeal & attachment I have for them & with what impatience I have waited for the scenes I now enjoy'.2 Soane set about recording ancient and more modern buildings in measured drawings, quite a few of them copied from, or carried out in partnership with, another former RA classmate, Thomas Hardwick. Unlike Hardwick, however, Soane did not overlook original designing, and it was no doubt this talent which brought him to the attention of his first patrons: Thomas Pitt of Boconnoc and the Bishop of Derry. Two more different personalities could hardly be imagined; Pitt remained the architect's adviser and promoter for life, while the Bishop's cordial but erratic behaviour ended in catastrophy. A dining room design by Soane, made in competition with an earlier one by John Henderson, won him the Bishop's protection. As a result, prelate and protégé set out on an extraordinary expedition to Naples and its environs. Soane's field notebooks record the Bishop's extraordinary range of interests as they crisscrossed Latium and Campania. For example on Christmas Day they 'stopped to examine the remains of the Villa of Lucullus, near Terracina', Soane later recalled, 'and after wandering over those monuments of departed greatness, we determined the site of the Apollo ... banqueted on mullet fresh from the ancient reservoirs ... and formed in our minds a restoration of the entire plan'.3 The Bishop knew the Plutarch anecdote about the Lucullan delights of the Apollo dining triclinium, and had Soane designing such a space soon after arrival in Naples on 29 December; not content with that, an imaginary Lucullan doghouse was set Soane as a design problem and his amusing 'Canine Residence in Ancient Times' was the eventual outcome.3 In a similar vein, Soane prepared the design for a mausoleum which blended the Bishop's favourite one at St Remy with the columns in the 'Soldier's Quarter' at Pompeii, which they had both admired4 (the version in VAM is probably that exhibited at the RA in 1784).  The Bishop's acquaintances included individuals with whom Soane made several sketching expeditions to Pompeii, one of them stealthily by moonlight in order to avoid the guards. On 22 January 1779 he was there with Pitt, Sir William Molesworth and Pennington, and a week later with Philip Yorke and Thomas Bowdler. The later occasion coincided with the first of two extensive visits Soane paid to Paestum. Yorke wrote: 'An English architect by name Soane who is an ingenious young man now studying at Rome accompanied us thither & measured the buildings'.5 Soane subsequently made drawings of Neapolitan and Roman antiquities for Yorke, the first of many commissions from the same patron. As for Bowdler, he provided the entrée to a group of Englishmen and John Stewart of Allanbank, who were planning a trip to Sicily and Malta later in the spring. John Patteson, another member, has left entertaining letters which document Soane's entire itinerary. During the Sicilian voyage Soane cultivated the acquaintance of other travellers who later became clients and friends, especially Rowland Burdon. Thomas Jones recorded dining with Burdon and Soane in Rome on 19 July just before their departure on a tour of Central and Northern Italian cities. They remained together until they reached Venice in September.6 Soane's main objective on the tour was to visit the Parma Academy, where he hoped to enter the next year's concorso in order to rival Dance's success. He sent a letter to Pitt all about the competition, and included sketches for an avant-garde waterworks design, with baseless Doric porticoes reminiscent of the Paestum temples. He worked hard on these designs after his return to Rome in the late autumn. But the Bishop's succession to the Earldom of Bristol at Christmastide interrupted all Soane's well-laid schemes for academic distinction. The lure of immediate employment in the British Islands proved too tempting for the ambitious and financially insecure Soane. He set off on his homeward journey, in the course of which he lost his trunk in Switzerland with all the Bishop's letters promising him employment.7 Somehow his precious drawings escaped the mishap, including two whole series apparently sponsored by the Bishop; one devoted to the works of Sanmicheli in Verona (copied from the original surveys by Luigi Trezza), another devoted to Swiss wooden bridges.  Soane had set out from Rome on 19 April 1780 together with Michael Pepper and his tutor the Rev. George Holgate. Genoa, 'the most charming City of Italy' according to Soane's last Italian pocket notebook, formed the highlight of his entire grand tour.8 One correspondent said of him 'You mean ... to be the gay gent: at Genoa', and, as another put it, Soane 'meant to plunge head and ears into the Noblesse'.9 He socialized easily with members of the English colony, bought himself a fine new suit of clothes, offered his friends a dinner party, and passed judgement on the architecture of the city with new-found independence. Letters from former grand tourist friends awaited him upon arrival (see Edward Pratt and John Patteson). Soane had developed into a cosmopolite, an authoritative critic, a respected designer, and a trustworthy artistic middleman, if not as yet a collector. No wonder he confided to his journal on 19 May: 'Left Genoa ... with heart felt sorrow in firm hopes of seeing it again'. Those hopes remained unfulfilled, but from the impressions and contacts he had made there he continued to draw inspiration and sustenance ever after.
Major Sole an officer from Port Mahon' left Florence on 11 September 1722 for Leghorn; on 12 October he arrived in Siena from Florence with William Bromley, and left the following day for Florence.1 He was probably the Major 'Soul' who died on 25 November 1731.2

Although he was a Protestant, Lord Charles Somerset's family had been well-known recusants in the Civil War and were later Jacobites. His two-year journey abroad, ending with his death in Rome, is recorded by an incomplete journal, and by his letters to his aunt, Lady Anne Coventry.1  In Turin, 'one of the prettiest towns in the world', he complained of the paper cases in the window instead of glass. Milan had too many churches, but all the blossom was out which 'makes it as sweet as if one was walking in one of the Orange houses at Badminton'. He was in Venice on 3 May 1709,2 and in Padua on 14 June.3 In Florence he saw festivities on the occasion of Cardinal de'Medici 'taking the Secular in Order to Marry the Princess of Guastallo'; he met the Grand Duke 'and after a different manner than is usual to people of my Sphere, upon account of his friendship as he told me he had with my Lord Duke when he was in England'. He also found in Florence 'not above five or six houses fit to lodge in and for eating there is no way unless one has ones own cook and provisions ... and we English made up no small part of their diversions some of them having Water Doggs and others Greyhounds, so that we had generally a Duck hunting or Coursing every day'. By now it was October and he planned to go to Rome after a bout of fever, cured by the Grand Duke's doctors, had left him 'a perfect skeleton'. He had reached Rome by 30 October 1709. In Rome he visited the 'prodigious' Vatican, the Sistine Chapel where Michael Angelo's Last Judgment 'shews his force of anatomy', and he noted the 'mapps of the country's ... done by Paolo Brilla'. In the Belvedere he was fascinated by the letters of Henry VIII to 'Anne Bullen'. On 4 November he went to Frascati to see three villas, including the Villa Ludovisi 'wch was in an indifferent pickle'. He admired the Barberini Palace: 'I can't pretend to give an account of [rooms], all I can say that it took us up a full afternoon'. In the church of S.Girolamo della Carita he saw Domenichino's St Jerome which, he wrote, was 'reckoned the second among the four principal pictures of Rome viz the first the Transfiguration on St Pietro Montorio by Raffael, the second of St Jerome by Domenichino, the third Romualdo, in the church of - by Andrea Sacchi and the fourth the taking down from the Cross in the Convent of French Minors at the Trinita dei Monti by Volterra'. Of these four pictures, the first three are now in the Vatican, the fourth remains in situ.  On 7 November he visited the Palazzo Farnese where 'all the marbles [had] gone to Palma' and, after a visit to the Raphaels and 'Hanibale Caraci', 'went to the Academy in wch are kept in Rome Professors of Sculpture, Graving Painting and all other Sciences at the K of France's expence to learn a perfection in those arts ... and copying all ye best pieces of each kind the first of furnishing his own palace wth copy's of these things of wch he can't have ... and the other of bringing those arts to be practis'd in his kingdom'. On 8 November he went to the Palazzo Colonna, 'the gallery to wch in that nature there is nothing to be compard ... the volta painted by Chiari with works by Poussin and di Bologna. The Constable has order'd a curtain to be drawn over some of the Pictures thinking them too loose and yet leaves that of his own Mother naked as she was born'. On the 11 November he marvelled at the Palazzo Borghese where he admired the works of Albani and Titian. His diary ends on 13 November. On 4 January 1710 he wrote to Lady Coventry from Naples: 'I don't doubt your ladyship will be surprized to find that I left Rome so soon'; two of his friends with whom he shared a house, Lord Stafford's grandsons, William Stafford-Howard and Mr Holman, had smallpox, but he intended to return to Rome. He did so early in March and in one of his last letters, to the Rev. Charles Aldrich, he wrote 'pray pardon the nonsense, my head being at this time pretty much out of order'. He died in Rome on 4 March 1710 of smallpox and his body was brought home to Oxford, to be buried at Christ Church.






On 2 June 1706 'Mr Southcott, a very young Gentleman of Essex came to Florence, in order to be one of the Pages to the Great Duke'.1 John Bellings saw him there in December 1710.2
Lord Southesk first went to Italy as a young man in 1709. On 26 November he was in Padua with Robert Dall, another Scot and possibly his tutor.1 He visited Berlin and Hanover where he spoke with the Electress Sophia and returned home from Amsterdam in December 1710 (CP).  As an attainted Jacobite, Southesk lived abroad from 1716, the Earl of Mar then describing him as 'a very honest man, and zealous servant of our master's, to whom he is no expense'.2 Southesk was in France before coming to Italy to join the exiled court. He was said to have come to Venice from Florence in March 1717,3 and on 8 March he had passed through Pesaro,4 where he stayed from at least 24 April to 29 May 1717.5 In July Alexander Cunningham reported from Venice that Southesk was one of the Jacobites who were disputing with the court at Rome 'about ye Ceremll'.6 He was then in Urbino, which he left for Rome, apparently in November. On 13 November he told Paterson that he had been 'very impatient to leave Urbino'; he had stayed 'twenty days' there, but had not been in good health and had not enjoyed the Jacobite company; now he was 'free from the chagrin of seeing myself looked down on by those who can pretend to no more than to be my equals'.7 He stayed in Rome until 20 March 1718 when he left for Naples; he was back in Rome by 6 April, sharing a house with Mar, who noticed that Southesk knew 'all the ways of this place pretty well'.8 He was probably the 'Milordo Sudeschi' living by the Strada Vittoria at Easter 1718,9 since he was noticed in Rome by George Berkeley at the end of April.10  Southesk was in Paris in June 1720, when his wife was in Scotland,11 but they are recorded several times in Rome during the next six years. Southesk was probably the 'Milord Giaco Sudasch' living with Clephane by the Strada Vittoria in Rome at Easter 1721.9 Colonel John Hay refers to him in a letter from Rome of 10 November 1722: 'My Lady S-que is in Scotland, at least her husband believes so. He expects her over, but I am affrayed she won't meet him so soon as he believes'.12 He was certainly in Rome by April 1723, when Stosch reported that Southesk was preparing to leave; but he was still in Italy on 22 May and on 12 June Stosch said he had been seized by creditors.13 Lord and Lady Southesk were in Rome in November when Lady Southesk visited the Pretender's wife with a Mrs Stafford,14 but the main purpose of this visit was for Southesk to deliver a memorandum from the Earl of Mar to the Pretender.15 On 24 September 1724 Rawlinson in Rome heard that Lady Southesk 'was lately delivered, and the infant baptized by the Revd Mr Berkeley [Barclay] one of the Church of Scotland Chaplain here in the Chevalieres court';16 the girl was called Clementina (she d. 1730 in Edinburgh). On 19 November 1725 Lady Southesk accompanied Princess Clementina when she left the Palazzo Muti and retired to a convent.17 In 1726 Southesk wrote a melancholy but eminently sensible letter to the Pretender begging him to restore 'peace and tranquility in your Royal Family'.18 An undated caricature of Mylord Southesk by P.L. Ghezzi was sold in 1979 (Sotheby's, 10 Dec.). Southesk died in Paris in 1730.
He was in Genoa in November 1725,1 and was presumably the Southwell in Rome in December 1725 who quarrelled violently with [Charles?] Hamilton over politics.2 In April 1726 Southwell wrote that he had spent three months in Rome and filled 140 pages in his journal with reflections on the grandeur of ancient Rome and its peoples; he had also spent '£150 on 5 marble tables, 2 landscapes of ruins, a little suite of brass medals, more use than show, £50 worth of prints of modern and antique Rome and of the chief paintings, 2 or 3 fans, 2 or 3 cameo's etc.'.3 Edward Southwell 'hibernus' was in Padua with W. Graham on 12 June 1726,4 and in July he was in Vienna.5
Southwell was in Rome in by 26 December 1763.1 'Southwel' passed through Capua on 22 March and 10 April 1764, indicating a visit to Naples.2 On 23 May 1764 James Martin noted that Thomas Jenkins in Rome had sold (possibly some time before) a copy by Annibale Carracci of his Venus by Titian to 'Mr Southwell now one of the Members for Gloucestershire for one hundred & thirty pounds'.
Thomas Southwell travelled to Italy with Giuseppe Baretti. They reached Italy via Portugal, Spain and southern France, arriving in Genoa on 18 November 1760.1 Writing from London on 10 June 1761 Dr Samuel Johnson urged Baretti to keep an eye on Southwell, having got him safely to Venice.2 In 1787 Father Thorpe remembered Lord Southwell, as he had then become, being in Rome 'more than twenty years ago'.3 He was presumably the Southwell elected to the Society of Dilettanti in 1765 (though this has also been identified as 'John [Thomas] George Southwell, 1721-80, later [1st] Viscount').4
Southwell was in Venice by 26 September 1759 when Lady Mary Wortley Montagu described him as 'A Tall, fair, well shap'd young Fellow, with a good character, the reputation of a good understanding, and in present possession of 12 thousand pound per annum ... he has neither visible Nose nor Mouth, yet he speaks with a clear audible voice ... He appears insensible of his misfortune and shows him selfe every day on the Piazza to the astonishment of all the Spectators. I never saw (so) shocking a sight'.1 He had left Venice by December, Lady Mary having become reconciled to his 'good behaviour and polite Conversation'.2 Stuart Mackenzie, the British envoy, met him in Turin and learned that as a result of a violent fever as a boy, Southwell had lost most of his teeth.3 By 5 July 1760 he was in Rome, and had attended the festivities on the eve of St Peter's day with other Englishmen including Thomas Robinson and Lord Torrington.4 On 25 July 1760 John Plimmer wrote that he had recently finished views of Rome and Naples for Lord Grey (later 5th Earl of Stamford) and Mr Southwell.5


On 7 March 1733 Brinley Skinner reported from Leghorn that 'Mr Sparrow who came abroad with Sir Thomas Grosvenor, is here on his way back to England'; the Jacobite Lord Dunbar (James Murray) had been 'to drink a bottle with him at Mr [Ezekiel?] Hamilton's' (SP 98/34).
At the age of thirty-one, when he was Professor of Poetry at Oxford, Spence - 'a good-natured harmless little soul' - began a decade of travel, comprising three continental tours and five and a half years in Italy.1 In between the two Italian tours with Lord Middlesex and Lord Lincoln he had taken John Morley Trevor to Holland and France (May 1737-Jan. 1738). Throughout his travels Spence compiled notebooks, wrote regularly to his mother in Winchester (Spence Letters; dates here in brackets), and recorded his conversations with some of the distinguished foreigners he met (Spence Anecdotes).2 Spence had never wanted 'high dignity in the world' (31 Aug. 1740), but 'one of the greatest advantages in travelling, for a little man like me, is to make acquaintances with several persons of higher rank than one could well get at in England' (25 Feb. 1741). In Italy his private interests were first confined to the Roman poets, but soon expanded to classical art and the relationship between the disciplines; 'Lysippus often would explain a passage in Virgil with a stroke of two of his chisel better than a dozen commentators' (Jan. 1733). His studies resulted in his Polymetis [1747], of which Thomas Gray had seen part of the manuscript in Florence in 1740. Spence's interests led to lasting acquaintance with Italian scholars, such as Dr Antonio Cocchi and Sebastiano Bianchi (curator of the Grand Duke's galleries) in Florence, and Francesco Ficoroni in Rome ('so old that he had been Conductor to Mr Addison when at Rome') - where he also consulted Stosch as a medallist. His appreciation of later Italian art was less motivated: 'as propriety and simplicity are the distinguishable character of the antient artists, in their allegorical figures, so multiplicity and impropriety may almost be looked upon as the distinguishing character of the modern'.3 His notebooks contain exhaustive lists of paintings and buildings to be seen in Italy, but his favourite painter was the 'divine' Raphael. At Turin in March 1740 Spence bought a cartoon allegedly by him, 'almost eight foot long and above six foot high' (16 Mar. 1740). In June 1741 he sat to Rosalba Carriera in Venice (priv. coll., Sierre);4 she was then well into her sixties, but shrewd enough to divine Spence's character from his appearance as 'Ni allegro, ni malinconico, ma un buonissimo misto'.5 Contemporary Italian literature disappointed Spence; there was nobody to compare with Alexander Pope who was talked of [in Venice] almost with more applause than in England;6 in Florence he tested the extempore skills of the improvvisatori,7 'admired so much by the little and great vulgar', as Dr Cocchi grudgingly allowed.8
By September 1732 Captain Spence, a freemason, had come from Gibraltar to Florence for his health; he was in Rome in March 1733,1 but back in Florence by the end of June.2
As giddy & unsettled at thirty as if he were only twenty', Spence travelled from Lyons with the Hon. Thomas Pelham, who found him difficult and left him at Turin before 4 March 1777.1 But that same month Pelham was asking for news of 'poor Spence' whose 'delay abroad must inevitably be his ruin, & will prevent any possibility of a reconciliation in his Family for his Wife who was once jealous may by a long separation grow indifferent'.2 Spence was in Rome from early April, intending to stay some time before proceeding to Naples.3 He was in Naples by the summer; in June he made a conquest of the King 'by his furious dancing' with a Miss Snow, and played tennis with him ('they are as great as inkleweavers', commented Swinburne); he also joined Pelham and Swinburne ('who unfortunately invited [him]') on an excursion to Ischia.4

Lord Spencer had already made a grand tour as a young man in 1778-80,1 when he took his wife to Italy for a brief visit in 1785. The brother of the glamorous Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire, he was a rather studious bibliophile and was easily outshone in society by his Countess. Horace Walpole had commented that Lady Spencer 'draws - incorrectly indeed, but has great expression. Italy will probably stimulate her and improve her attention'.2  They were in Bologna early in October, when Lord Spencer wrote to his mother concerning a version of Guido Reni's Liberality and Modesty (he owned the original) which he had seen in the Palazzo Monti.3 James Clitherow later alleged that Spencer had given 1,100 gns. for a 'duplicate' of Guido Reni's Liberality and Modesty in the Villa Borghese.4 By 8 October they had arrived in Florence,5 and by 12 November they were in Rome,6 where Colin Morison sold Lord Spencer a portrait said to be by Titian.7 Spencer commissioned two large landscapes from Jacob More, Cascade of Tivoli at Sunset and Falls of Terni by Moonlight (sold from Althorp c.1980), which were delivered in 1789.8 Lady Spencer was alleged to have offered 12,000 gns. for Guido Reni's Magdalene at Monte Cavallo.9 On 18 December the Spencers were about to leave Rome for Naples,10 where they climbed Vesuvius, still hot from recent eruptions,11 and Lady Spencer cold-shouldered Lady Elizabeth Foster (then part of the celebrated ménage à trois involving Lady Spencer's sister-in-law).12 They were back in England by 16 March 1786.13

Lord and Lady Spencer set out for Italy in June 1763, their party consisting of a young daughter [either Georgiana, b. Jun. 1757, or Henrietta, b. Jun. 1761], Spencer's former tutor William Arden, a chaplain, a physician and eight servants. 'Her Ladyship, it is feared, is inclined to Consumption', Horace Mann was advised, and a long stay in Naples was intended.1 It was not, apparently, the easiest of parties, Arden later confessing that Lord Spencer had an 'unhappy disposition to look always on the worst side of things, and if he does not find a subject for fretting to make one', which made 'both himself and his company insensible to much of the satisfaction which the circumstances of our journey might have occasioned to us.'2  They had left Turin on 28 September 1763 for Florence on their way to Naples.3 They were in Milan on 1 October,4 and in Florence by 28 October, when Lady Spencer attended a Burletta given by Lord Fordwich (later 3rd Earl Cowper; Lord Spencer's half-brother), James Martin then thinking her 'much handsomer than any of the Italian ladys'.5 She also attended the opening of Mann's new house.6 Lord Spencer succeeded in buying from Mme Acciaiuoli two large Salvator Rosas, Diogenes and Cincinnatus, which Patch had copied before they left Florence sometime before November 1764.7 Early in November the Spencers passed a few days in Rome, enough for Lady Spencer to enchant Winckelmann8 and Cardinal Albani, who thought her the most accomplished lady in the world, and commissioned for her a vase of transparent alabaster.9  Although they were listed as passing through Capua on 2 December,10 Changuion reported their arrival in Naples on 5 November, 'after a most fatiguing and even most disastrous journey, their coach having been broken down more than once, and having had the misfortune to lose their Italian volante who in the night was drowned with his horse in a ford near Capua'.11 They had taken a house for the winter, during which they saw much of Lord Exeter, Lord Palmerston, Lady Orford and David Garrick.12 They had come for the benefit of Lady Spencer's health, but it was her husband who was 'ill the whole time', as Lord Palmerston put it: 'it is a thousand pities he has not a better constitution, he seems to be a man whose value few people know. The bright side of his character appears in private and the dark side in public'. Palmerston, who was frequently in the Spencers' party in Italy, joined them in an excursion to Paestum, one of the earlier expeditions made by British travellers to those Doric ruins.13 The Spencers returned to Rome at the beginning of March 1764,14 passing through Capua on 8 March, four days after Palmerston.10  Lady Spencer at least had benefitted from their stay in Naples, and in Rome the Duke of York, who dined with her, observed in April that he had never known her 'so well as at present'.15 She continued to see Garrick, and in the gardens of the Villa Medici presented him with a wreath of bays which he acknowledged with extempore verses.16 She sat to Batoni for a portrait dated 1764 (Clark/Bowron 269; Althorp); Martin saw it on 6 May and thought it 'a very strong likeness'.17 Lord Spencer meanwhile had commissioned a picture from Nulty, which Martin saw on 14 July,17 and had acquired more old masters. He was 'in treaty about ye famous Magdalen of Guido in ye Barberini Palace at Rome', he had bought 'a famous ring which was Prince Eugene's, & bought of Count Zanetti at Venice', a woman's head by Raphael ('as they say'), and 'a very good sketch of a Picture by Baroche'.17 (It was probably Lord Spencer who acquired Raphael's Ansidei Madonna from Gavin Hamilton at Rome in 1764; see Lord Robert Spencer.) The Spencers left Rome in June ('about a fortnight ago', wrote Garrick on 25 June18), and they were in Spa in mid-July. On 19 July Lady Mary Coke said they had been there about a week: Lady Spencer 'seems to be quite recover'd, is very glad She has seen Italy but still happier to have left it, as She tells me it the last Country She would live in; She stays here till September, & then either returns to England or goes for a month to Paris; I think Ld. Spencer is inclined to the latter. They mett the Duke of York in many Places in Italy.'19  On their return Lord Spencer continued to furnish his new Spencer House in London with works of art from Italy. In 1765 he told William Hamilton in Naples of his purchases of antique sculpture: 'I have not lost the taste I acquired in Italy for Vertu'.20 In 1765 he commissioned The Landing of Agrippina from Gavin Hamilton (conceivably to secure Hamilton's services as an agent in Rome). Hamilton was to correspond with the Countess both concerning his progress with this large and expensive picture, and with the purchase of other 'capital' pictures for the ballroom at Spencer House, which included Guercino's Samian Sibyl and King David from the Marchese Locatelli of Cesena [Althorp].21  Lord and Lady Spencer were apparently again in Italy in 1769. They were in Nice 'for the recovery of their childrens' health' in December 1769,22 and when Lady Mary Coke met them in Aix in February 1770, she wrote that they seemed 'much pleased with their journey to Italy & with the Climate of Nice' and intended to be back in England at 'the very beginning of March'.23 See also Margaret, Viscountess Spencer. Listed among the Althorp MSS is 'an entertaining diary of a tour abroad in the years 1763, 1764, 1767 and 1769 by apparently the then Dowager Countess Spencer in company with some of her children and grandchildren' (HMC 2, 19b-20a).
Lady Spencer survived her husband over thirty years. Between 1792 and 1794 she returned to Italy, much of the time with her two remarkably spirited daughters, Georgiana and Henrietta, who had become respectively the Duchess of Devonshire and Viscountess Duncannon (later Countess Bessborough). Most of her later travels are described elsewhere, but there are additional references to Lady Spencer alone.  She looked 'unhappy and as if she wished to get away from herself' when she was at Lausanne in September 1792,1 but in Rome she continued the Spencer patronage, Flaxman producing for her thirty-one illustrations to the tragedies of Aeschylus between 1792 and 1795.2 In Naples she started the waistcoat club, knitting clothes for allied troops engaged in the French wars.3 The same month she was offering her apartment to Sarah Bentham, who found it too small.4 She spent some time with the Palmerstons, who arrived in Naples in mid-December, accompanying them to Capri,5 and later to Florence and Venice (25-27 May 1794).6 In March 1794 Thomas Brand discovered Lady Spencer in Salerno with Edward Poore, looking at manuscripts in the Benedictine monastery at La Cava; she 'has a general leave from the Pope to carry temptation into any religious house she pleases', wrote Brand, 'and to display her singular beauty to monks of all orders'.7
With his tutor Moore (presumably the Rev. Dr John Moore who had been his tutor in England), Lord Robert arrived in Venice in February 1767.1 They passed through Bologna and on 2 March arrived in Florence, where they 'bowed to their Royal Highnesses'2 and Horace Mann provided an introduction to Cardinal Albani in Rome.3 They appear to have stayed in Rome until June. On 27 May Lord Kildare was considering travelling back to Florence with them 'as their intentions are to go rather a roundabout way to see the waterfall at Terni', and they were all in Florence by 27 June. On 21 July Kildare said that Spencer was leaving Florence 'next week'.4 Although Lord Robert is said to have acquired Raphael's Ansidei Madonna (NG London) from Gavin Hamilton in 1764 (in which year he was seventeen years old and in England), he does not appear to have acquired works of art while he was in Italy.5 Lord Robert returned to Italy in 1771. He arrived in Florence at the end of February, expecting to be in Naples by Easter,6 and it appears he was back in Rome from Naples early in April.7 On 5 June he came from Pisa to Leghorn with Mann, Lord Cowper and Lord Tylney; they all left for Florence on the 12th.2





Stafford was in the Young Pretender's service and left Rome in April 1744 for France; he stayed thereafter in Avignon.1 Horace Mann called him 'a creature of My Lord Bath'.2 Boswell met 'Mr Stafford, an Irish gentleman who was of Prince Charles's train, a good, blunt, worthy fellow' in Avignon in December 1765.3 He was presumably also the Henry Stafford who came to Rome in 1766 with the Young Pretender, see John Stewart of Ardvorlich.


On 18 October 1739 the Catholic Lord Stafford arrived in Siena with his governor Mulloneux, a Jacobite who had been a page at the Court of Lorraine, and Charles-Just, Prince de Beauvau.1 On the 21st they visited Leghorn,1 and they apparently spent some time in Florence where, according to Stosch, Stafford (with Lord Quarendon) first displayed Jacobite sympathies.2 They were back in Siena by 20 November and finally left for Rome on the 27th.1 In Rome Stafford and Quarendon consorted much with the Pretender, again according to Stosch who considered they were misled by Mulloneux.3 In February 1740 Stafford collaborated with Francis Dashwood in the mock Papal conclave (see Dashwood) and, with Edward Coke, paid particular attention to the anglophile Princess Eleonora Borghese (who married Prince Francavilla that year).4 Stafford went on to spend nearly three months in Naples, staying on after Quarendon departed in May.5 On 5 August Stafford arrived in Florence from Rome.6
They were in Rome in November 1723, Stosch reporting that Mrs Stafford had visited the Pretender's wife with Lady Southesk (SP 85/14; 20 Nov. 1723).
Mr Stafford with Mr Holman, 'both Grandsons to my Lord Stafford who was beheaded' were lodging with Lord Charles Somerset in Rome in December 1709, when they contracted smallpox.1 The 'Nephew to my Lord Stafford', was in Florence from December 1710; on 15 February 1711 he dined there with John Bellings; on 26 September he again met Bellings in Trent: 'Mr Stafford joyned us here from Florence'.1
Stanhope had joined the Coke brothers and Sir John Buckworth in Venice by March 1729 and they had travelled south together through Bologna (see Buckworth). By 17 November they had returned from Naples to Rome,1 where on 5 January 1730 Stanhope was suffering from smallpox from which, however, he quickly recovered. He was still in Rome on 10 August.2 He is next heard of in Venice in mid July 1732, when Elizeus Burges said he was intending 'to go out of Italy before ye end of the summer, & then make ye best of his way home'; he added that, while Stanhope was a very worthy man, 'I wish, for his own sake, he loved Play less than he does. He has no other failing, & that can hurt nobody but himself'.3 Stanhope was in Padua on 15 July.4 In October he wrote from Lyons to Lord Essex thanking him for 'the many favours receiv'd from you during the whole time of my stay in Turin'.5
A fine, sprightly, Idle boy, with very good parts and no application',1 George Stanhope was attending the Academy in Turin in August 1733. He was then fretting at his confinement, and wanting to 'go abroad whenever he would without the Governor of the Academy's Permission'.2 He was probably in Turin at the same time as his far more serious elder brother Philip. George was back in London by March 1736, 'pursuing all the gayeties the town can afford'.3
Returning to take command of the British forces in Spain, James Stanhope passed through northern Italy in the spring of 1708. He wrote to the 4th Earl of Manchester from Savona on 18 May 1708, thanking him for civilities received in Venice and revealing that he had since been in Turin and Genoa.1 He was presumably also the Stanhope whom Lord Rochford was to meet in Genoa in April 1710 (see William, 2nd Earl of Rochford).
Lord Stanhope was a scholar, deeply versed in mathematics and Greek, and with a passion 'for democratic principles' (DNB). Having completed his studies in Utrecht and Geneva, he went to Italy with a tutor, Mr Delaporte. They stayed for four years, but their itinerary is not completely clear. In 1732 Stanhope may have attended the Academy in Turin (where his contrasting and presumably uncongenial younger brother George was also staying). From Milan on 6 January 1733 Stanhope thanked Lord Essex, the British ambassador, for his kindnesses in Turin, and said he now 'found all the English Gentlemen ... that left Turin in my time'; he was enjoying the opera and was to stay ten days longer with William Fauquier 'in order to hear the rehearsals of the second Opera which will begin to be acted on the Stage ye 20th of this Month'; he had already asked Elizeus Burges in Venice to secure him good lodgings.1 He was in Padua on 25 January 1733,2 and on 27 February Stanhope, the 6th Earl of Salisbury and Sir Thomas Twisden were about to leave Venice for Rome.3  While he was in Venice Stanhope sat to Rosalba Carriera; the portrait, dated 1733, is at Chevening.4 On 28 June he was in Florence.5 In August 1733 Lord Essex was telling the 4th Earl of Chesterfield that 'if Lord Stanhope goes on as he does he will soon kill himself, and he is horridly Possitive. I extreamly pity poor Mr La Porte who takes vast care and pains with him'.6 He probably returned to Turin in the summer of 1734, Lord Chesterfield approving such a scheme.7 At the end of December 1734 he came from Florence with Charles Fane to pass a few days in Leghorn.8 At the beginning of June 1735 Stanhope was leaving Florence, proposing to call at Turin on his way back to England.9 Back in England, Delaporte told Lord Essex that Stanhope had now 'more health & spirits than when your Lordship last saw him, & takes now a good deal of exercise'.10
Philip Stanhope made the grand tour with his tutor Walter Harte. From his father's Letters it is possible to deduce much of their Italian itinerary. Having been in Germany and Switzerland in 1746-8 with Edward Eliot, they came alone to Turin in February 1749 and went, apparently via Switzerland, to Venice in June/July and August 1749.1 In December they were due in Rome, where at Easter 1750 they were staying in the Strada Paolina.2 Stanhope, 'in spite of his father's earnest and galant exhortations', became 'smitten by the accomplishments of the amiable Eugenia [Peters]', whom he subsequently and secretly married, see Peters. By the end of March 1750 they were in Naples, and on 24 July they had arrived in Florence from Rome,3 passing through Siena where both were unwell. In Florence Edward Thomas received 'vast civilities' from them, Stanhope giving him a letter of introduction to Cardinal Albani's secretary in Rome.4 By November Stanhope and Harte were in the south of France; they stayed some time in Paris before returning to England in July 1751.
Mr Stanhope, a whig, was reported in Rome on 1 January 1718,1 and William Kent mentioned Mr Stanhope there on 18 January, 8 June and 16 August.2 Thomas Stanhope was in Padua on 18 December 1718,3 and in Venice in February 1719, Alexander Cunningham then telling Lord Stanhope, 'Your cousin Mr T. Stanhope thinks of leaving us soon for which I am trulie sorrey'.4 He went to Padua, and at the end of May proceeded 'toward Verona', hoping to return to Venice 'in six weeks'.5 'Mr Stanhope, Colonel Stanhopes eldest Brother' returned to Venice in mid-March 1720.6
The rich younger brother of the 4th Earl of Chesterfield (author of the Letters), he was over fifty and somewhat deaf when he paid the first of three visits to Italy. Yet four years before this visit his London house had put Horace Walpole more in mind of Florence 'than anything we have seen here'.1 On his first visit he passed through Florence2 before arriving in Rome early in November 1753; he went straight on to Naples, passing through Capua on 7 November with a Mr Creichton.3 In January 1754 he was presented at Court in Naples,4 and he accompanied the British envoy Sir James Gray on a second presentation.5 In March he made an excursion to Rome for Holy Week; Cardinal Albani, who presented him to the Pope, noticed the Abbé Grant 'already at his side'.6 On 12 April Stanhope was passing through Capua on his way back to Naples, again with a Mr Creichton.7 'Instead of going to Venice for the Ascension, as he had promised his nephew [Sir Charles Hotham], he returned to Naples, where I hear he has taken a house for a year', wrote Horace Mann; 'he has quite recovered his hearing and is vastly happy'.2  It is unclear how long Stanhope stayed in Naples, but he was in Padua on 21 April 1755,8 and when he next appeared in Rome in December 1755 he had just returned 'from the North',9 a lengthy tour of the European courts, wrote Robert Adam, 'Russia, Poland, Prussia and with His Majesty at Hanover'.10 Adam thought him 'extremely clever, knows the world as well as anybody', and he listened to Stanhope's advice on how to advance his architectural career.11 During his stay in Rome Stanhope bought two landscapes from Thomas Patch to 'to assist him [Patch] in his journey' (his banishment) to Florence.9 He 'offered large sums for pictures in the galleries of Rome - to a thousand crowns a piece',12 and gave the painter John Parker (who called Stanhope the 'only one of taste' then in Rome), several 'large commissions for pictures and statues'13 - which were later withdrawn as Stanhope learned of Parker's eccentric behaviour.14 Stanhope left Rome in April for Naples,15 where he stayed with John, Lord Brudenell, and Henry Lyte at the residence of consul Isaac Jamineau.16 In July 1756 Stanhope was about to leave Florence (bringing back to England the maintenance agreement between Lady Orford and her estranged husband).17  Five years later, with his 'very agreeable young wife' he was in Florence, 'eager to get to Naples'. 'He is in hopes', Mann wrote in November 1761, 'that the warmth of that climate may enable him to repair the loss of my Lady's miscarriage some time ago'.18 Stanhope was fifty-nine, his third wife, Anne Delaval, was twenty-four. From the beginning of November they were in Rome, where Stanhope kept a gaming table at which 'all the gaming English' would gather, including James Adam - whom Stanhope obligingly introduced to Lord Tavistock and the Duchess of Grafton.19 Stanhope is known to have stayed in the Via Babuino at Signor Leoncilli's on one of his visits to Rome (see above, p.xlv). They left for Naples on 5 January 1762, having been closely attended by the Abbé Grant,20 who was to visit them in Naples in February, 'if there is no rupture between England and Naples'.21 It was said that Grant 'got into a scrape with Sir Wm Stanhope who he accompanied to Naples, and was said to have been useful in conveying Letters from an Absent Lover &c.' (see above, p.xlv). They sailed from Naples in the summer of 1763 for Marseilles,22 but when they returned to London on 5 August 1763, they agreed to separate forthwith.23  With 'a crazy, battered constitution, and deaf into the bargain',24 Stanhope had returned to Naples on his own by April 1765. He was very friendly with John Wilkes, who told Boswell in June that he was frequently seeing his 'old friend' Stanhope.25 Stanhope was on his way home in May 1766, Mann then writing that he was 'most extremely dissatisfied with Naples, which lost all merit with him by not restoring his vigour enough to get an heir to his family [on his previous visit]'.26 He was back in England 'from Naples' in July 1766.27 In November 1767 he was wintering in Nice.28

Stanley, British consul at Trieste, was in Florence and Rome with his wife between October 1790 and February 1791; in July 1791 they were back in Trieste.1 In 1795 Stanley passed through Venice on 20 October with a Mr Walker.2
Hans Stanley 'has good parts, much knowledge, and good breeding, but his manner is not agreeable', Walpole warned Horace Mann.1 Stanley was in Florence by the end of July 1765 and went on to Rome in August. His tour was then curtailed by changes of government at home, and he spent only 'four or five days at Rome, in order to hasten to Paris to be near his friends'.2 Cardinal Albani confirmed meeting 'Mr le Comte Stanley' at Rome in a letter to Mann of 24 August.3 Stanley would have had little time for virtù, but the previous year he had been asking Lord Palmerston to look out for portraits by Veronese 'perfectly fresh and well coloured',4 and in February 1766 Gavin Hamilton thanked Palmerston for having recommending him to Stanley.5
Sir John and Lady Stanley had left Rome sometime before mid-May 1771 to go via Florence to Venice.1 They were probably the 'Milord Stanglij con sua moglie' who arrived in Venice on 8 May.2 On 21 May 1785 Lord Grey de Wilton met Lady Stanley in Turin,3 a visit doubtless made to see her son who was studying there (see below).
Stanley had been educated abroad at Brunswick (1781-2), Neufchâtel (1782) and Montpellier and Turin (1783-5). In 1787 he travelled in Italy with Oswald Leycester. They went to Rome, where Leycester composed a Latin epitaph for James Six, Stanley's friend who had died in Rome the previous year, and Stanley visited the Palazzo Muti and saw the Young Pretender. From Naples on 23 May 1787 they embarked on a tour of Sicily which lasted through June.1 Leycester subsequently advised his brother Hugh and Charles Abbot on their tour of Italy in 1788.
Stanley was travelling with Father William Meynell. They were in Capua, on their way to or from Naples, on 24 February 1773.1 In September 1774 Father Thorpe remembered Sir William Stanley and William Meynell being in Rome 'about two years ago'.2

Brother of the sculptor Edward (1681-1734), Thomas Stanton spent nearly all his life in Italy. In 1742 he was removed from the post of Assistant to the Masons' Company in London, having been one of the Court for forty years without, latterly, attending their meetings (DBS). His wife Cordelia died on 17 September 1737 and was buried in the Protestant cemetery in Leghorn (Leghorn Inscr., 31).
Stanyan was first in Italy as secretary to the English embassy in Venice in 1697-8. He returned in January 1712 on a special diplomatic mission to Milan, where he tried to adjust differences between the Austrian Emperor and the Duke of Savoy during preliminary peace negotiations.1 Early in June 1713 Stanyan passed through Turin on his way back to Berne, where he was British envoy extraordinary.2
By the end of December 1772 Staples had 'recently' passed through Florence, where he had left some commissions with Francis Harwood for alabaster vases.1 On 2 December he passed through Capua on his way to Naples with a Mr Tollemache,2 and on 15 February 1773 he was in Rome, with Richard Neville and Thomas Orde following a course of antiquities with James Byres.3 He sat to Batoni in 1773 in Rome (Clark/Bowron 367; Museo di Roma) and he appears in two conversation pieces attributed to Wickstead painted at Rome c.1773, with Byres, Richard Neville, Thomas Orde, and William Young (Springhill, Ulster; Audley End) and with Byres, John Corbet, William McDowall, Sir John Rous, John Chetwynd Talbot and Tollemache (Ham House, and priv. coll.).4 He arrived in Venice with Young on 10 March 1773.5 Perhaps he was also the Staples who arrived alone in Venice on 11 May 1774.5 Piranesi dedicated a plate in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778] to 'Sir J.S.'.

Stapleton attended the funeral of James Six in Rome in December 1786, and was in Naples with Mr Delon, a Swiss, on 18 January 1787.1 He was probably the Stapleton already noticed in Rome before April 1786.2 He sat to Maron in Rome in 1787 (London art market 1982). On 24 February 1787 Father Thorpe wrote that 'Grey: Stapleton' with Stonor was leaving Rome for Florence 'the week after next' and going through Lombardy to reach Venice for Ascension; he was then talking of going on to Vienna and being home by Christmas.2 On 4 September 1787 Lord Cowper in Florence regretted that '[Stapleton's] stay here was so very short that I had not the time to shew him any civility'.3
Mariana Starke came to Italy with her elderly parents in 1792. They spent the winter of 1792-3 in Pisa, and frequently saw the Flaxmans in Rome in April and May 1793.1 They returned the following winter to Pisa, where her father (Richard) died on 5 March, aged seventy-four.2 On 21 March 1794, Mariana was about to join 'her friend' Lady Bolingbroke (who was then in Pisa).3 In January 1795 Captain Cochrane saw Mrs and Miss Starke and Miss Ruddle in Pisa.4 In November 1797 William Artaud told his father that Miss Starke and her mother and a Miss Ruddle had spent some five years in Italy; 'they are three of the most amiable and sensible women I ever met with. Miss Starke ... has an uncommon fund of literature and genius. She is Mistress of Latin, Greek and oriental languages ... They are people of considerable fortune and live in a very elegant style ... They are very much attached to all professors of art and literature, and their house is the rendezvous of the most rational and agreeable society'.5  But most of the evidence for the Starkes' sojourn comes from Mariana's Travels in Italy [1802] in which she mentioned spending seven years in Italy with a consumptive relative - probably her mother, since she refers to her 'endeavours to mitigate the sufferings of those most dear to me' (1:v); she also stated that her enquiries were handicapped by her 'occupation as a Nurse', and that her accounts of pictures owed much to William Artaud (1:252n).  The Travels take the form of a sequence of letters, the first of which is dated Nice, September 1792 (and the itinerary above is taken from the subsequent letters). The first seven provide a historical and at times first-hand narrative of the French invasion of Italy (which includes some documentation of the French requisition of Italian works of art; 1:1-181). They invaded Nice in October and the Starkes got away to Genoa, arriving on the 14th (1:48). The French next caught them up in Florence on 30 June 1796; English families had been invited by the hospitable Florentine authorities to retire into the country (1:93), but the invasion was not violent, and the Starkes did not move to Rome until the end of October 1796 (1:114). When the French reached Rome in February 1797 the Starkes chose to leave for Naples. But they returned that October (1:155) 'and discovered not, for several weeks, any cause to repent our determination'. Prices then began to rise and there were civil and ultimately military disturbances, culiminating in the exile of the Pope, who was sent to Siena on 20 February. The Starkes left Rome probably in January for Florence, and by June 1798 they were in Dresden on their way back to England. Subsequent letters concern the principal Italian cities (Rome, for example, is described in terms of a twelve-day tour). A series of appendices provides practical hints on climate, 'things most requisite for an invalid', currency, additional details of accommodation and services in Leghorn, Pisa, Florence, Rome, Naples, Sorrento, and Venice, and a timetable for travelling within Italy. Starke's manner is brisk; she could characterise the Romans, for example, as possessing neither 'the worth of the Tuscans, nor the good-humoured buffoonery of the Neapolitans'. A revised edition, Letters from Italy, appeared in 1815. Following another visit to Italy in 1817-19 she published Travels on the Continent in 1820. She died in Milan in 1838.


Stawell's name (sometimes written 'Strawell') recurs frequently in the Ramsay jnl.MSS between April and July 1783. Allan Ramsay regularly met Stawell in Naples between 15 April and 14 June, and in Rome from 27 June, when Stawell was lodging at the Casa Nuova di Barucci, to 10 July, when he received a last sitting for his portrait from H.D. Hamilton and set out in the evening for Venice. On 1 July John Ramsay had recorded that Stawell had commissioned some chiaroscuros from 'Pang' [Rouby?], an English student in Rome, and that on the 8th Stawell had just returned from Tivoli.
Thomas Steavens was on the Continent from 1747. His diary of a visit to Germany, Bohemia, Vienna, Italy and France 1747-52 was at Alscot Park, and some of his letters to Sir Charles Hanbury Williams (to whom he was secretary at Vienna in 1747/8) survive.1  In August 1749 he was in Venice where he met Philip Stanhope; soon afterwards he was critically ill in Padua.2 In May 1750 he was proposed for the Society of Dilettanti by Sir James Gray at Venice (and he was duly elected in March 1751).3 He was presumably the 'Mr Stevens' mentioned at Florence in August 1750 by Horace Mann, who alleged that his mourning (actually for his mother) was for the departed beauty of the Signora Capello.4 Pancrazi dedicated a plate in his Antichita Siciliane [1751-2] to 'Tomaso Stevens'. Steavens appears to have visited Sicily; an engraving after Pigonati (almost certainly a Sicilian view, Pigonati being a military engineer who was stationed there), Ruine del tempio d'Esculapio, is dedicated 'all'Illmo Tommaso Steavens cavaliere Inglese'.5  Steavens was back in Italy in 1753. In April Walpole was recommending to Mann 'Mr Stephens ... a young Gentleman now in Italy', brother-in-law of the antiquarian James West, and of 'the greatest and most amiable character'. Steavens was in Florence about May 1753 and in Reggio early in June; he was not well (blaming women for his illness) and he wished, wrote Mann, 'to be warm'. After spending fifteen days in Bologna he returned to Florence at the end of June.6 He was probably the Mr Steavens presented at Court in Naples early in January 1754,7 and the 'Monsu Tomaso Stivens' residing in Rome at Easter 1755, 'Selciata verso S.Sebastianello'.8  In January 1755 Robert Wood in Rome had described 'Young Stephens' as being loyal to Lord Charlemont.9 On 31 January 1756 T. Steavens wrote from Rome to Lord Huntingdon, defending the character of Thomas Patch (who had just been banished from Rome to Florence);10 his letter also reveals he had been working for Cardinal Albani in a secretarial capacity. 'Stevens', the friend of monsignor Piccolomini in Rome, was helping Patch in December 1755/January 1756, and was with Patch in Florence in February 1756.11 He was in Rome, 'still shining away' in May 1756,12 and in October at Florence Richard Phelps found his friend Steavens 'just ready to depart for England'.13  Christopher Hervey later [in 1761] remembered Mr Steavens 'the timber merchant's son, who made a great figure here at Rome four or five years ago. He is dead you know. While he was at Rome he had the pleasure of being in the good graces of the prettiest lady that was then in [Rome]'-the marchioness Gabriele-and 'when she died Mr Steavens did a very popular thing at Rome, which was to give a present of a hundred Roman crowns to some priests to pray for her soul'.14

In 1760 James Forrester etched in Rome fifteen Italian views by P. Stephens. Twenty-two plates after Stephens (some etched by Forrester), appeared as Prospects in Italy with short remarks on them by Abbate R. Venuti Antiquarian to the Pope [London 1762]. In 1767 appeared the Raccolta di alcune delle piu belle vedute d'Italia. 150 Views of Italy Etched by Various Artists Chiefly Designed on the Spot by Peter Stephens Esq., which carries as a frontispiece a profile portrait of Pr.Stephens Armig.Com.Salop. by Nathaniel Dance. The subjects include Genoa, Turin, Padua, Ancona and Loreto, besides Rome and Naples, and they are etched by Christopher Norton, C.F. Nicole and James Forrester. A collection of 94 drawings and 121 etchings by Stephens (priv. coll.) also contains views of the Alps, Vicenza, Ravenna, Messina and Ancona, but the majority are of Rome and Naples and their environs.  A 'P. Stephens' wrote from Ischia on 12 August 1753 to a Signora Anna, mentioning that he was taking 'views of my favourite spots'.1 Peter Stephens was one of Jonathan Skelton's friends in Rome in 1758,2 and he may have been the 'Monsu Stiven Eretico' living on the Strada Gregoriana at Easter 1758.3 In 1763 'Cavalier Stefano-Inglese-eretico' was living in the Strada Felice with Forrester and George Dance.4 In 1772 Mann recalled him as 'the mad Stephens' who had been in Florence 'for a long time and at Rome, where he printed a small number of his drawings'.5 See also Peter 'Governor' Stephens below.
Stephens spent much time in Italy with Daniel Crespin. In 1760 'Pietro Stiner' (whence his forename is here taken) was lodging in Rome with Crespin on the Strada Gregoriana.1 They were together at Rome in February 1761, and in February and April 1762 ('Governor Stephens'). At Easter 1763 'Cavalier Stefano' was sharing rooms with James Forrester and George Dance in the Strada Felice.1 In September 1763 'Governor Stephens' had recently left Rome for Bologna.2 On 17 April 1762 Thomas Jenkins in Rome had told Lord Cardigan he had a book from Mr Stephens to forward to London.3 See also Peter Stephens above.

He had arrived in Rome by 30 December 1728 and was described on 24 March 1729 as a relation of Sir Thomas Dereham (SP 85/16, ff.484, 517; 30 Dec. 1728, 24 Mar. 1729).
Possibly also the 'Stepenson' listed at Rome on 6 July 1794 (Oracle, 21 Jul. 1794).
Stephenson was elected Worts travelling scholar (see Thomas Kerrich) in 1791 and three of his letters survive, from Margiae ad Lacum Lemarum, June 1792; Florence, June 1793, and Rome, March 1794 (CUL, W'n MSS, Oo vi 95-7).
He was introduced to Cardinal Albani in Rome by Horace Mann in February 1763,1 and on 5 March, in company with the 4th Duke of Gordon and Charles, Lord Hope, he was about to be conducted round Rome by Winckelmann.2 'Mons Stivanson e mons Duccane' [Peter Du Cane] left Venice on 4 June 1763.3
In January 1773 she was in Florence with her daughter and a Mr Morgan (Lord Winchilsea thought he was a clergyman). They left Florence in February, and in April Mrs Stepney was suffering from gout in Rome (Winchilsea letters MSS, 19 Jan., 16 Feb., 17 Apr. 1773).
He arrived in Naples in December 17701 and was still there the following April, when he and Henry Fothergill had their chaise overturned on the road to Portici.2

Already consumptive, Sterne determined in September 1765 to 'saunter philosophically for a year or so, on the other side of the Alps'.1 Peter Beckford delighted in his 'eccentric genius' in Turin,2 where Sterne also met Sir James Macdonald (Laird of Skye) who was to be his travelling companion in Italy, and was presented to the King. After 'a joyous fortnight' the two, with Macdonald's tutor 'Ogilby' [William Ogilvie], went on to Milan. There Sterne met the poet-priest Gian Carlo Passeroni and the historian Alessandro Verri. By 18 December Macdonald and Sterne were in Florence, curious to meet Horace Mann (who had found the earlier parts of Tristram Shandy very diverting but 'humbugging', and later volumes 'nonsense pushed too far').3 Patch painted Sterne and Death (Jesus Coll., Camb.) and engraved the composition (the work doubtless spread over Sterne's two visits to Florence). Mann gave Sterne a letter of introduction to Cardinal Albani at Rome, where Sterne arrived on Christmas Day.  In Rome there was little time for Albani 'de jouir de son erudition, et de ses saillies', but Sterne did succeed in sitting for his marble bust to Nollekens (NPG), whose pleasure at the result lasted him 'even to his second childhood'.4 Macdonald and Sterne met Harry Errington, whom Sterne had known for some three years, and they decided they would travel home together through Vienna and Berlin. Meanwhile early in January the three went to Naples, where they found 'about five and twenty English' visitors staying the winter (14 Feb. 1760); they attended 'operas - punchinellos- festinos and masquerades' (5 Feb.), and enjoyed the hospitality of William Hamilton. On 3 February Sterne felt able to write that he hoped to have 'added at least ten years to my life by the journey to Italy - the climate is heavenly'; he even considered he was 'growing fat, sleek, and well liking' (5 Feb). In March Sterne and Errington left Macdonald (who had been suffering from acute rheumatism) in Naples to return to Rome for Holy Week; they travelled on horseback, 'full of cross accidents', he told Hamilton, 'but all was remedied along the road by sporting and Laughter' (17 Mar.); they stayed one night at Monte Cassino where the Benedictines treated them 'like Sovereign Princes'. In Rome he wrote 'I am much recover'd in my health, by the Neapolitan Air', adding that he had spent 'a jolly laughing winter' in Naples (30 Mar.). Early in April Sterne finally set off from Rome, where he left Errington; he had reached England by 14 June 1766.

After being admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in Edinburgh in 1735 Steuart travelled to Leiden, Avignon and eventually Rome where, having met the Stuart Princes, he became converted to the Stuart cause.1 In January 1739 Samuel Crisp described him as 'the prettiest most agreeable little cur that ever liv'd, if he was not such a Jacobite', and again mentioned him in Rome in April.2 Sir James acquired five Jacobite portraits painted by Dupra in Rome in 1739 (James Carnegie, Dr James Irwin, Lord John Drummond [later 4th titular Duke of Perth], Captain William Hay and Bellingham Boyle), each sitter described as belonging to the 'Society of Young Gentlemen Travellers at Rome in the year 1739'; Carnegie was said to have travelled for many years in Italy with Steuart.3 Steuart himself sat for his portrait (variously attributed to Dupra or David; priv. coll.). In October 1739 Stosch reported that Steuart 'and his companions' had left Rome for Venice,4 and he was back in Scotland in July 1740.  With the other 'Young Gentlemen Travellers' Steuart was an active supporter of the 1745 rebellion and was subsequently in exile for eighteen years, until 1763. He and his wife (the sister of Lord Elcho) were in Paris until 1754, Brussels in 1755, and then in Germany. In 1758 they left Tubingen, where they had settled, crossed the Tyrol and came to Venice in May. They met Lady Mary Wortley Montagu (then seventy years old) who quickly became a close friend; she found Sir James a man 'of uncommon Sense and Learning' and his wife 'a Lady that without Beauty is more Aimable than the fairest of her Sex'.5 The Steuarts were in Padua later in May, Lady Mary then describing them as 'a Distress'd Lady and Gentleman'.6 On 10 August 1758 the Steuarts had left Venice; 'I feel greatly the loss', wrote Lady Mary; 'there are not many such Couples'.7 They returned to Tubingen and did not return to Edinburgh until 1763, after the Seven Years War was over.8
Celsius Stevens met Andrew Mitchell in Rome on 1 June 1733. They made several tours in Rome accompanied by Martin Folkes and they left together for Bologna on 12 September 1734.1 On 4 February 1734 Richard Pococke had met in Rome 'Stephens a good mathematician' whose father [re]married '& thereby displeas'd his son who comes here as far as I can find on little'; on 12 March Pococke added that Stephens had studied law at Oxford and had been in Rome 'for years'.2 The 'Stevens' whom Spence met in Rome in May/June 1732 might have been Celsius.3
On 27 August 1773 the 4th Earl of Rochford told William Hamilton in Naples that 'Mr Stevens, a very noted and ingenious Architect', was proposing soon 'to visit the principal Cities in Italy and to remain there with his Family for two or three years'.1 On 13 January 1774 Stevens, 'Architetto e Professore nell'Accademia di Londra', was elected to the Accademia del Disegno at Florence.2 He was in Rome by Easter 1774, when 'Eduardo Stiveny - Inglese non Cattolico - 23' was living on the Strada Gregoriana.3 In Rome Mr and Mrs Stevens were among the closest friends of Thomas Banks and his wife,4 and they knew Ozias Humphry, Romney and Joseph Wright of Derby. On 5 August 1774 William Chambers wrote to him in Rome, urging him to study hard and to 'see with Your own eyes'; he was pleased to hear of Stevens's 'perfect recovery', the first indication of poor health.5 Sometime in 1774 Stevens was at Pompeii where he made drawings of the Temple of Isis (see Thomas Hardwick).  Stevens died in Rome on 27 June 1775, aged 31, and was buried near the Pyramid of Cestius; he left a widow and a daughter.6 Mrs Stevens was still in Rome in July, proposing to return to England with Joseph Wright and his wife in about a month's time; Humphry urged her to stay on as 'every day will make you more familiar with your loss'.7 Mrs Stevens replied from Leghorn on 18 August that she was sailing to Marseilles with a Roman lady companion, and that she hoped Humphry would be able to complete her husband's portrait; meanwhile she rebuked Humphry for having written, in the third week of her widowhood, that she would be the 'only object' for thirty or forty bachelors.8 Joseph Wright told Humphry from Parma on 24 July that Stevens was to have paid Jenkins for shipping his (Wright's) pictures back to England.9  A sale of Stevens's 'valuable collection of Casts', 'most of which were collected during his travels in Italy', was held at Langford's in 1776 (7 Feb.). A manuscript Common Place Book with Copies of Letters, Remarks & Observations of a Journey made from England through France & Italy commencing September 1773. By Ed Stevens Architect (ending in June 1775; priv. coll. in 1951), mentions meeting with the Duke of Cumberland and Zoffany.
In 1756 Stevens published Miscellaneous Remarks Made on the Spot, in a late Seven Year Tour Through France, Italy, Germany and Holland. He had spent the winter of 1738-9 in Paris before arriving in Genoa on 14 June 1739 and during the next few years he visited the principal cities of Italy. They are not described in chronological sequence and his itinerary is not entirely clear.  He was in Siena and Florence in the winter of 1739-40 and in Florence again in February 1743, when he described the death of of the Electress Dowager of the Palatine, Anna Maria, 'the last of the illustrious house of Medici' (134). He was first in Rome in August 1740 when he witnessed the coronation of Pope Benedict XIV. In the autumn of 1743 he was in Naples; returning to Rome presumably in August 1744 he caught a glimpse of the battle of Velletri. He returned to England via Bologna (he was there when George, Viscount Beauchamp, died in September 1744). He sailed to England as George II was returning, probably therefore on 31 August 1745. His description of the Papal Jubilee of 1750 appears to be second hand. His comments on buildings and works of art are not original (several derived from Lassels's Voyage of Italy1) and the main interest of his book lies in the observations on Italian life. In Siena, where he spent five months, he saw the famous singer Senesino's house, known as the English Folly because of the English furniture he had brought from London (99), and at Pisa he witnessed the fête of the Battle of the Bridge (142 ff.). He was in Florence at the time of a great flood (probably that of early December 1740),2 when the image of the Virgin kept at Imprunetto was brought to the city to avert further calamity (147ff.). He mentioned the theft of a bronze satyr 'as big as life' from the fountain at the Palazzo Vecchio, allegedly by an Englishman, although 'how the Florentines could discover it was one of our countrymen, especially as the theft was done in the dark, I cannot conceive; for this I can confirm, that no nation in Europe are so well respected and caressed in Italy as the English' (109). He described at length the 'many religious processions and useless, stupid ceremonies' of Holy Week in Rome, and remarked on the licensed whores living in little houses directly opposite the Pope's gardens (229). He was critical of the Antiquaries in Rome who would pretend 'a copy to be an original', thereby procuring a handsome premium for both buyer and seller; but some could not even tell a statue or medal of Constantine .. from that of Alexander the Great' (180). English Protestants, he observed were buried by the Pyramid of Cestius; they used to be buried alongside 'the excommunicated whores, but since the chevalier de St George [the Pretender] has resided in Rome, he has prevailed with the Pope, that they may be buried near this monument; however the common pathway is over the place where they are interred, which plainly shews what great regard they have for us hereticks' (187). Stevens concluded that 'if, from the foregoing faithful account of the wretched and miserable state of slavery and subjection, both ecclesiastical and civil, both in body and soul ... one single reader should be made sensible of the inestimable blessings he enjoys ... I have not altogether laboured or lived in vain'.


A bon viveur and an occasional writer of satirical verse, John Hall (as he then was) is said to have made the grand tour on leaving Oxford in 1738, and 'occasionally seems to have visited the continent' thereafter (DNB). 'John Hall Stevenson' was in Capua on 26 January 1753 (ASN cra 1257).

Probably also the 'Stuard' listed in Florence on 14 August and in Siena on 16 August 1773 (Gazz.Tosc.).

He sat to Batoni in Rome in 1773 (Mount Stewart; Clark/Bowron 357), the portrait apparently a companion to Mengs's portrait of his brother Robert, which was probably painted in 1758.

The Abbé Grant mentioned Charles Stewart in familiar terms in two letters from Rome of 17 May and 5 July 1760, addressed to James Grant of Castle Grant (who was also acquainted with him).1 On 5 July Stewart was at Frascati with the Princess Borghese, expected back in Rome the next day, when the Abbé said he would pass on James Grant's message concerning his 'master at Venice'; in the same letter the Abbé mentioned 'the Stewarts' watching the fireworks at Castel Sant'Angelo on the eve of S.Peter's Day.1 Charles was possibly also the 'Stuart' who left Venice with Panton in February 1760 for Rome and Naples (see Thomas Panton).

James Stewart 'lived a great deal' with Charles Fox, the 2nd Earl Fitzwilliam and the Marquess of Kildare at Florence.1 He left Florence on 15 March 1768,2 and Turin at the end of the month. 'I know no gentleman better liked than he has been in every town he has passed through', wrote Kildare.1 He had sat to Batoni in Rome (Sotheby's, 10 Jul. 1991; Clark/ Bowron 316).
An exiled Jacobite, John Stewart wrote from Rome on 4 December 1717 to the Earl of Mar, thanking him for taking him into his service, and he was presumably the Jacobite 'Stuart' listed in Italy on 7 December.1 On 22 January 1718 he was sending verses from Rome to Mar's secretary, John Paterson ('When cashiered colonels poets turn / And clients' claims their lawyers burn'). On 29 January he was telling Mar of architects' designs, and describing the habit of 'visiting' without leaving one's coach: 'if a man pleases, it entirely depends on himself not to be seen nor see anything here, except palaces, pictures, statues and architecture and to hear music'. On 12 February he wrote an introverted letter to Mar: 'we have nothing like fine conversation. Our best and noblest ones are those of Cardinals and princes, which strangers have liberty to go to, but for one that does not play and will not allow themselves, if they do, to be cheated by the ladies, there's no pleasure to be hoped for that way. Then the graver sort of men either ask you questions or talk nonsense in a political way, and, if one chooses that of the young men, their whole discourse runs on -- and to keep them company one must visit all the zitellas in Rome'. He was in Leghorn in June 1718.2

Arrested in Scotland as a Jacobite agent, John Stewart escaped from Inverness gaol c.1736 and went to France, whence he was sent on a mission to Rome, perhaps c.1740.1 He may have been the John Stewart writing from Rome to Scotland about public affairs in April 1741.2 He subsequently escaped from Scotland with the Young Pretender after the 1745 rebellion and died in France (He is apparently confused with John Stewart of Ardvorlich by Ruvigny and Dennistoun, 2:103).
He came to Rome with the Young Pretender in 1766 as his major-domo, one of three faithful servants (with Michael Sheridan and Henry Stafford).1 Father Thorpe described him as the Young Pretender's valet de chambre in 1771.2 He was made a Jacobite Baronet in 1784, in which year he was sent to Paris to collect the Young Pretender's illegitimate daughter, Charlotte (Duchess of Albany).3 The Young Pretender (d. 1788) left him (his maestro di casa) a legacy of £750 p.a. which Cardinal York reduced to 1250 scudi. Stewart had married an Italian lady c.1772 and had issue (a son becoming Colonel in the Papal service).
Soon after his marriage to an heiress of the Coutts banking family, Stewart took his wife and two of his sisters, Margaret and Elizabeth, to Italy. In April 1779 he was in Rome with Thomas Bowdler observing Holy Week. Immediately afterwards they went with Rowland Burdon, John Soane, Henry Greswolde Lewis and John Patteson on an expedition to Sicily. Leaving Naples on 21 April, they arrived at Palermo on the 29th (see also Patteson); Bowdler and Stewart made a briefer tour than the others (Bowdler was back in Leghorn by 10 June). Stewart apparently stayed in Naples, where Soane, ever seeking a rich client, was attending him in July and visiting him almost daily in Rome the following winter.1  In January 1780 John Hippisley reported Stewart living in Rome en Prince, 'but he complains that his wife's Escutcheon, being an Heiress, obscures too much of his own Shield ... he spends his money, & has the consolation to be very comfortably laughed at for his Pains. However our friend the Abbé [Grant] dines every day there'.2 He was presumably the Stewart whom Hippisley introduced to the painter Thomas Jones in Rome on 13 January.3 On 7 March 1780 Hippisley secretly married in Rome Margaret, one of the Stewart sisters ('not the red-haired one'; see Hippisley). The Stewarts left Rome on 19 April, Stewart incensed at the behaviour of Thomas Jenkins as a banker.4 See also Elizabeth Cicciaporci.
Dr Stewart with his wife, and her daughter from her previous marriage, were in Florence in April 1793.1 On 1 July 1793 Lady Shelley promised to take good care of Lady Webster's children (while their mother returned to England), and her husband 'Dr Stuart', 'a very good physician', watched over the children with an Italian physician Gianetti.2 At the end of the month, still in Florence, Dr Stewart was attending David Ker.3 By December the family were in Naples, where Sarah Bentham described 'Dr Stewart, the Husband of Lady Shelley who has come to Naples for his own Health, and had been Physician of Eminence at Southampton, came this morning to see Our dear Invalid [Mrs John Farr Abbot]'.4
Keith Stewart was several times in Italy while serving with the Mediterranean fleet. He sat to Batoni in Rome in the mid-1760s (priv. coll.; Clark/Bowron 294); he was in Turin in July/ August 1764,1 and in August 1765 he was warning Boswell in Florence against the dangers of sailing to Corsica.2 Byres met him in Naples on 12 March 1766.3



In March 1768 Captain 'Steward' was to deliver to Horace Walpole Patch's caricature of Tristram Shandy.1 He was probably the Captain Stewart described as a successful caricature artist in Florence.2




Stock was listed in Siena on 16 August 1773,1 and was presumably the Stock who arrived in Venice on 15 April 1774.2
According to his Memoirs [1809], he was a man with considerable pride in his unrecognised literary abilities. In 1767 he resided for two years in Villafranca, 'where he read and wrote assiduously' (Memoirs, 2:25ff. DNB).
Stonor was sent to Rome by his uncle in 1748 as the English Catholic Agent, and was admitted into the family of Cardinal York. He became one of the Pope's Chamberlains and successively prelato di Mantellone and prelato di Mantelletta. He retired from Monte Cavallo to a house on the Strada Giulia and died on 12 April 1795.1  He was constantly visited by English visitors to Rome. In April 1755 he had accompanied the Abbé Grant, Robert Adam and Clérisseau on an excursion from Rome to Naples; he was well known to James Byres,2 but seems to have taken no part in the business of the fine arts.
Stonor had come from Lyons to Florence in November 1729,1 and a month later he was in Rome, being observed by Stosch. A Catholic, he was accompanied by his governor, a monk in disguise, and they frequented Jacobite circles; by 19 January 1730 Stonor appeared to have formed an intimate association with Lady Anne Maxwell; he left Rome early in May, his conduct considered rather reserved for a Catholic.2


The 'Stopfor' listed in Capua on 10 March 1753 (with Robert Rochford, Brinsley Butler and others),1 was probably the James Stopford who sat to Batoni in Rome for a portrait which has been dated c.1755 (London art market 1993; Clark/Bowron, p.375).

At the age of twelve, and with the receipts from a benefit concert held for her in London in April 1778, Anna Storace accompanied her father to Naples, where she sang in concerts given in the S.Carlo theatre during Lent. Her brother Stephen, an equally gifted young musician, was then studying there. Anna went on to study in Venice under Sacchini, and Florence, where she played at the Pergola theatre in 1780. She sang in Parma in 1781 and at La Scala Milan in 1782. In 1784 she was engaged to sing in Vienna. She had returned to England by 1787 (DNB). Michael Kelly recalled Anna as the prima donna of the Comic Opera at Leghorn at the age of fifteen, i.e. in 1781.1 Mount Edgcumbe considered that 'a harshness in her countenance, a clumsiness of figure, a coarseness in her voice, and vulgarity of manner, ... totally unfitted her for the serious opera, which she never attempted'.2  For her second visit to Italy, see John Braham.
A most gifted violinist, Storace went to Naples at the age of twelve, i.e. in 1775, to study at the Conservatorio S.Onofrio where he stayed 'for several years', before returning to England sometime before 1783 (DNB). John 'Warwick' Smith met him several times in Naples in October and November 1778, and he was still in Naples in February 1779,1 when his passport was withheld since he owed money to the firm of Wills & Leigh.2 Michael Kelly met him with his sister Anna in Leghorn, apparently in 1781, calling him the 'most gifted creature I ever met with'.3
Stormont wrote from Turin on 15 September 1751 that he lived 'constantly' with Lord and Lady Rochford; he was planning to set out for Genoa and then go by Milan, Florence, Parma and Modena.1 On 10 December he was writing from Florence,1 where Horace Mann thought him 'a most agreeable and sensible young man',2 and he was daily expected in Rome on 12 January 1752.3 He travelled to Rome with Henry Seymour Conway and they lodged together, their time 'totally employed in virtu'. Mann had introduced them to Cardinal Albani 'who has promised to be mighty civil to them, but I believe', wrote Mann, 'they will dispense with all civilities that would make them lose any time'.4 Conway (who was home in mid-March 1752) probably left Stormont in Rome, but the remainder of Stormont's itinerary is unclear.  Stormont returned to Italy in 1767 soon after the death of his first wife. His health had since been poor and he told the Abbé Grant that he came to Italy to recover.5 He spent the winter at Naples, where he was presented at Court on 1 December,6 and he wrote to Mann on 3 December saying he was in Naples for his health, but hoped to see him at Florence in the spring [of 1768].7 He left Naples on 12 February,8 and was evidently in Rome by the 20th.9 In Rome Stormont greatly impressed Winckelmann, who considered him to be the most learned person of his rank he had ever met.10 He sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 327; Scone Palace), and on 9 April had just returned from an excursion in the Campagna.11 Stormont was in Florence by 23 April,12 and three days later Mann described him passing some hours every day 'either in the Gallery or in the Palace Pitti where the collection of Pictures is now so well disposed that the access to them does not interfere with the Court'.13 On 3 May Mann described Stormont's health as 'much impaired by the deep melancholy that continually hangs upon him', and on 17 May Mann reported his departure from Florence on the 10th for Genoa, intending to see Marseilles and Toulon before returning to his diplomatic post at Vienna.14 On 24 May Mann told William Hamilton that Stormont was on his tour 'en provence' and he had arrived at Genoa on the 11 June,15 having passed through Milan.16 He went on to spend a week in Venice, leaving for Vienna early in July, still with a cough.17

A Catholic, Stourton was travelling with Lord Arundell's chaplain, Father John Carroll, who had joined him at Bruges. They set out in mid-1771 through Germany, arriving in Italy through Trento.1 On 20 October 1771 Stourton enrolled as a student at the Collegio de'Nobili S.Francesco Saverio at Bologna,2 and Father Thorpe referred to him there in November.3 Carroll was writing from Rome in January 1772, and Stourton was in Venice from 15 to 27 April 1772 with William 'Sthale'[?].4 On 22 October 1772 Stourton and Carroll arrived in Rome to spend only a few days before going on to Naples (yet they were both listed at Capua on 13 October5). They returned to Rome for the winter and left in about March, passing through Loreto, Florence, Genoa, and Turin to France, and reaching Liège in July.
A son of Lord Stourton's' was in Venice in May 1796, en route for Constantinople with Father William Meynell, Morritt liking him 'extremely'.1 William Joseph was the only one of the 17th Baron's sons old enough to have been travelling at this time.
Stourton died of pleurisy in Turin on 28 January 1725, aged nearly sixty. He had served the Sardinian Court as master of horse to the Princess Louisa of Savoy and had been governor to the Princes Maurice, Eugène and Emmanuel de Soissons (Historical Register 1725: Chronological Diary, 8).


On 2 February 1780 Father Thorpe wrote that 'the younger Mr Middleton Constable [i.e. William Constable-Maxwell who had assumed the name of Middleton] with his Sir Alex. Strachan' had not yet appeared in Rome1 (Middleton Constable was subsequently in Rome with Charles Plowden in October 1780). Strachan was in Rome by 22 December 1782, when young John Ramsay met him with Henry Blundell,2 and he left on 3 February 1783 to return to England, bearing a package from Father Thorpe for Lord Arundell.3 On 8 January 1783 John Thomson had written from the Jesuit College that Strachan had been in Rome 'these two Months with his pupil a very wild youth [unidentified] & Sir Alexr is heartily tired of his office & longs to be in Scotland again. They are recalled by the yng man's father & leave this country next month'.4
Stradling had arrived in Rome from Vienna by 25 March 1737 with Lord Sherard Manners.1 That summer he wrote from Rome concerning the improvidence of the Rev. Benjamin Smith.2 On 30 September Stradling sent to Leghorn for export to England 17 modern paintings, three scagliola pictures, and a modern marble bust of a lady.3 He was still in Rome in February 1738 when George Sinclair met him.4
Lord Strafford was travelling with a Danish governor, Grevenkop. They were in Hanover in September 1740, anticipating passing through Florence that winter; they were to be back in England in March and proposed travelling through Italy and France before then - 'a pretty notion a young man can have of foreign countrys by this way of travelling!'1 Strafford was in Rome by January 1741, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu noticing that he was behaving 'really very modestly and genteelly, and has lost his pertness he acquired in his mother's assembly'.2 It was from Strafford's box at the opera in Rome that Joseph Spence observed the Pretender.3 On leaving Rome, Strafford went to Leghorn, Pisa and Lucca, although Lady Mary had thought he was to go straight to Florence.4 Strafford arrived in Florence from Rome in mid-February 1741, 'looking extremely young to be married', wrote Lady Pomfret, 'but talks very well, and is well bred'.5 (Strafford was to marry in England on 28 April, when he was nineteen years of age). On 5 March he left Florence for Bologna.6 Strafford had apparently commissioned four marble copies of classical statues while he was in Italy,7 and he bought some scagliola pictures.8 Later, in 1755, he was buying pictures in Rome through an agent, see Thomas Brand (1717-70).

Strange was an eminent geologist, antiquarian and connoisseur, and in the fifteen years he spent in Italy, principally in Venice, he continued to develop these interests, besides acting as the British resident from 1774 to 1786 (and officially until 1789). His addiction to painting, and particularly the Venetian school, also led him into dealing and at his death he owned a large collection, not only of pictures, but also of antiquities and books. He was respected for his knowledge - 'Oh mon ami, que M.Strange est un précieuse trouvaille pour un vrai naturaliste!',1 - and valued for his connections with Venetian artists. On his father's death in 1754 Strange was left in very comfortable circumstances, and he is said to have travelled in France and Italy after leaving Cambridge (DNB).  He was next in Italy with his wife, exploring the Alps, his route occasionally crossing that of the Bishop of Derry. In April 1771 they were rambling together 'in the mountains contiguous to Vicenza' with the Abbé Fortis, the Paduan naturalist and polymath, and it appears that Strange was then living in Padua. In May the Bishop left his young son (John Hervey) with Mr and Mrs Strange in Venice, explaining that he was 'so accustomed to these tokens of friendship from you both'. and he was characteristically gracious to 'Madame Montaigne [Mrs Strange], who deserves to be preferred to all the Basaltes in the world'.2 Strange was in Switzerland by August 1772, returning to Italy in January 1773; he was then at Geneva from April to June 1773 and in Lyons in July.3  He was appointed British resident at Venice in 1773, but he did not arrive there until 28 August 1774 and he was then absent for some months in 1775.4 In March 1775 George Romney in Venice said Strange had 'the character of being a very recluse man, so much so, that he has not yet received any of the foreign ministers, nor been out of his house since he came to Venice'.5 In August 1778 Dr John Warner described 'Notre petit Resident' at an offical ceremony sweating 'under an immense, heavy, thick, black cloth gown, and a furious full-bottomed periwig, which covered the upper part of his body as well as his head'.6 In April 1777 Horace Mann referred to Strange's 'long and tedious' diplomatic correspondence in connection with the visit to Venice of the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester in September-October 1775,7 but when the Royal visitors returned to Venice in May-June 1777 they stayed for two days with the Stranges at their country villa near Treviso, consequently, and by special dispensation, renamed 'Gloucester Lodge'.8 This was possibly the Villa Loredan where Strange was living in 1785-6 after his wife's death and which was painted and drawn by Guardi.9 Strange was not, perhaps, the most sophisticated diplomat, but he was certainly dutiful; as he once told Sir Roger Newdigate, 'we poor ramblers have no settlement; for such is surely the Lot of our itinerant Profession ... I am too much totus in illis in whatever engages me, particularly where Duty is concerned, to think of a journey to England merely for spasso'.8 Intellectual life was less inhibited10 and continued to range over several disciplines. Strange planned to bring out a new edition of Zompini's Le Arti che vanno per le vie nella citta din Venezia, he submitted papers on natural history for the Transactions of the Philosophical Society in London (some of which were translated into Italian) and in 1776 he was discussing with Newdigate the publication of Roman monuments in France.11 He helped finance the Abbé Fortis's archaeological tour of the Adriatic coast and Dalmatia, and became friendly with the Abbé Ignazio Vio of Murano, a distinguished natural historian. But his closest associate seems to have been the collector and dealer Giuseppe Maria Sasso, who was largely responsible for building up Strange's picture collection; their correspondence, preserved in the Museo Correr in Venice, reflects their shared tastes and temperaments.12 Strange was much taken with Venetian painting, from the fourteenth to the eighteenth centuries, though he found affection for older pictures was waning as people now wanted only 'modern trash'. Sasso acquired for him works by Giorgione, Titian, Veronese and Tintoretto, but Strange also enthused over Rosalba Carriera and Tiepolo, admired the earlier and accurate works of Canaletto, and particularly patronised Guardi, though wishing he could restrain his 'spirit' and admit more 'truth'. Strange was himself active as a dealer, for example selling a set of six Guardis to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, and obtaining for the same college a major Pittoni altarpiece (see Thomas Martyn). In June 1783, at the time of Mrs Strange's death, there was some correspondence concerning a more urgent sale of some of his pictures to ease his finances, but John Dick, the former British consul at Leghorn then back in England, told him that there was now no market - 'the Truth is that almost all our Nobility and Gentry have for Years past lived beyond their Incomes, and even those who have long been in possession of good Pictures are daily selling them'.13 But the crisis, if such it was, appears to have passed. In 1784 William Lock asked him whether he would like to buy a house near Dorking on Lock's estate,14 but Strange did not leave Venice until 20 October 1786 and then took a house at Ridge near Barnet. He only resigned his appointment as British resident in August 1789.4  Strange is said to have paid several further visits to Italy to organise the return of his collections (DNB), which were dispersed in London between 1789 and 1801; the pictures by private contract (many were first exhibited as the European Museum); the prints, drawings and antiquities by Christie's, the natural history items by King, and the library by Leigh and Sotheby (a sale lasting 29 days in March and April 1801).
Strange was nearly forty years old when he went to Italy, a high-minded, ambitious and extremely competent engraver. Married to Isabella Lumisden, sister of the Pretender's assistant secretary in Rome, he had fought as a Jacobite in 1745 and lived in France until 1750, studying engraving in Rouen and Paris. In 1760 he left his wife and young family in London to spend four years in Italy, making drawings for subsequent engraving: 'It is only by studying and meditating upon the works of the Italian masters', he explained, 'that we can reasonably expect to form a true taste'. He was aware that his Jacobite background could work against him, and recognised that it was in his interest 'at present to behave with circumspection, by which means I shall the more readily baffle and disappoint my enemys'.1 Walpole succinctly forewarned Horace Mann in Florence of Strange's arrival: he was 'a very first-rate artist, and by far our best. Pray countenance him, though you will not approve his politics - I believe Albano is his Loretto'.2  Strange left Paris on 16 September and by 30 October he was writing from Florence. He was drawing Raphael's Madonna della sedia and already daring to anticipate 'immortale honour'; Horace Mann had 'done me great honour' and the Marquis Gerini had presented him with a volume of prints from his collection. On 17 November the drawing was still unfinished and Strange was trying, unsuccessfully, to buy some pictures for himself; perhaps, he told Lumisden, Thomas Jenkins would help him in Rome. But Strange was already involved in the celebrated case of the pictures bought by Lord Fordwich (later 3rd Earl Cowper), which was to pursue him over the next two years, his high-mindedness opposed by Jenkins's opportunism.3 'Pray what sort of a chap is this Jenkins?', he asked Lumisden; 'I find he is here the favourite of none'.  At Mann's house in Florence, with Lord Torrington and others, Strange had been shown the Fordwich Perseus and Andromeda by Guido Reni which he innocently recognised as a copy from a picture at Kensington Palace. Fordwich recalled his other three pictures from Leghorn (a Lucretia by Domenichino, a Venus by Veronese, and a St Jerome by Guido Reni) and showed them to Strange, who found them (as did Ignazio Hugford) unsatisfactory. He confided his opinions to Torrington and Mann in Florence, but later talked more freely in Naples, because of the 'concern I had at seeing such numbers of bad pictures imported into Britain'. Jenkins heard of these comments from Haughton James who had been in Naples and, through George Richardson, publicly challenged Strange. In the summer of 1762 Jenkins and Strange each signed declarations absolving themselves of any original intent to defame the other's character. Strange privately alleged that the Perseus and Andromeda had been offered to Richard Dalton for 30 crowns, that it was sold a few days later for 40 crowns to Jenkins, who sold it to Fordwich for £150; Fordwich had paid 'about £500' for his four pictures together, and regretted his purchase ever after.  Meanwhile Strange had left Florence, paid a rapid visit to Bologna to see what he would draw on a later visit (and possibly to make some purchases for Sir Lawrence Dundas), and arrived in Rome by the end of the year.4 He had promised Mann 'to behave with the utmost prudence and to make a very short stay there'.5 Cardinal Albani mentioned to Mann 'false rumours as to what had happened [to Strange] at Bologna'6 (possibly refering to Strange's purchases), but his Roman sojourn was successful. His drawing of the Madonna della sedia was greatly admired and the Pope's nephew, Prince Rezzonico, gave him an apartment in the palace and permission to erect scaffolding as he pleased for the taking of copies (which the previous Pope had banned). By June Strange had almost finished drawing Domenichino's St Cecilia in the Borghese, and was intending next to draw Guido Reni's Herodias in the Corsini [now Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Antica]. But in July Lumisden said that he had just finished drawing Raphael's Justice in the Vatican [Sala di Costantino] and that he was working on the companion Meekness; 'with all his application and anxiety to get home', he told Mrs Strange, 'I do not believe he can finish the drawings he proposes to do here in much less than a year', but he added 'His drawings will surprise all Britain, as they do every one here'. Strange had considered copying the Parnassus, but after the scaffolding was erected he did not go on, because he said, 'the principal figure is amongst the most indifferent, and has the least grace of any that great master ever painted'. The School of Athens was too vast an undertaking and, in any case, he said, he wanted to 'vary my subjects and authors as much as possible, and that even those be of the most agreeable kind, such as will please the public, and best suit the genius of a free people'. In September 1761 Strange was again dealing, trying to buy Guido Reni's Magdalene from the Barberini Palace [now Rome, Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Antica] for Horace Mann (who was acting for Lord Royston, later 2nd Earl of Hardwicke).7 By the time he left Rome Strange had also drawn Titian's Venus blinding Cupid [Palazzo Borghese], and Guercino's Death of Dido [Galleria Spada]. Early in October 1761 Strange set out for Naples where he spent the next ten months (although he had originally intended a visit of a few weeks). He drew Parmigianino's Madonna in the Monti collection, Guido Reni's Potiphar at the Baronelli palace [now Holkham], and a Rubens portrait of himself with Van Dyck. Although the British minister had failed to get him permission, he was given leave to copy in the Capo di Monte by Prince Alicandre, the King's Governor, after showing his drawings, and he was also granted an apartment in the palace. 'Mr Strange is at Naples doing wonders', the Abbé Grant reported.8 He went on to copy Titian's Danae, a Mistress and Child by Parmigianino, Schidone's Cupid and Two children singing, and a Van Dyck Sleeping Christ. Strange also bought in Naples a Holy Family by Raphael, but found nothing for Horace Mann, who had asked him to look out in Rome and Naples 'for anything capital' (apparently for the Royal collection).9  Strange was back in Rome by August 1762 and on 4 September was elected to the Accademia di S.Luca. It was probably at this time that he bought the portrait of Charles I by Van Dyck, said to have been presented by James II to Cardinal [Philip] Howard, thence to James Edgar (the Pretender's secretary), on whose death in 1762 it was bought for Strange by Andrew Lumisden. In October he left to return to Florence, where Mann described him in December with 'a numerous and well-chosen treasure of his own drawings': 'he has been very much distinguished wherever he has been, and particularly admired for a new method that he has invented of drawing in colours'.10 Lumisden described this technique as a change from his red chalk to making miniatures 'in water-colour painting upon a prepared skin, called in Italy pelle di capone'.  Strange spent 'about four months' copying in Florence and then early in March 1763 went through Bologna to Parma, to copy the Correggio's Day [Madonna and Child with S Jerome]. He was handsomely received by M. du Tillot, presented at Court and elected Professor in the Accademia on 23 May.11 By 13 May he had finished drawing the Correggio, and he told Morice 'I am at present in possession of about Thirty drawings, all the most agreeable subjects and from the most celebrated painters. I have no less than six from Raphael, four from Titian, four from Guerchino, besides others from Guido, Domenichino, Skedony, Parmegiano, Rubens, Vandike &c &c'. On 24 May he left for Bologna, where he encountered difficulties in obtaining access to the pictures he had chosen to copy, apparently due to Richard Dalton and Bartolozzi.  Strange had met both in Bologna as he passed through on his way from Florence to Parma, and had then told them that he was proposing to copy two Guercinos, the Circumcision (S.Gesu e Maria) and Abraham and Hagar (Sampieri coll.), and two Guidos, SS Peter and Paul (Sampieri coll.; now Brera, Milan) and Cupid (Aldovrandi Palace) when he returned to Bologna. But when he came back he found that Bartolozzi had already drawn the Circumcision and SS Peter and Paul, while Dalton was (unsuccessfully) treating for the purchase of the Cupid. Strange told Lumisden on 28 May that he was 'a good deal shagreened at Mr Dalton', and Albani told Mann in June of Strange's difficulties with the church of S.Gesu e Maria - 'vous savez ce que sont les têtes des Femmes; mais celles voilées sont bien plus opiniâtres que les autres'.12 Strange eventually had permission for two copies (the Circumcision and SS Peter and Paul) through help from a Hanoverian, the Duke of York, and a Stuart, Cardinal York. Samperi, however, then reneged over the SS Peter and Paul and Strange copied instead Raphael's St Cecilia. He was also elected to the Accademia at Bologna (7 June 1763),13 before leaving on 24 August for Cento to copy Guercino's Noli me tangere. He returned to Bologna in October,14 staying until March 1764. He then left Italy through Venice, Parma and Turin, where he had arrived by 26 April,15 and he was back in London in July 1764. In 1769 Strange published his Descriptive Catalogue of a Collection ... collected and drawn during a journey of several years in Italy, and on 31 January 1771 he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno at Florence.

Seeking relief from the boredom of life in Dorset and Somerset, Mrs Strangways-Horner left her husband and travelled in Europe with her only child, Elizabeth (1723-92, who m. Stephen Fox, later 1st Earl of Ilchester).1 In the autumn of 1732 she had joined Henry Fox (see 1st Baron Holland), her Dorset neighbour, in France and is said to have travelled with him on the Continent for the next two years. She was in Naples in February 1733, when David Lewis told Lord Palmerston it was a pity her daughter wasn't ten years older; she would then make him a daughter-in-law.2 Mother and daughter sat to Solimena for an outsize double portrait (Melbury) completed by 13 March, an event celebrated by Henry Harris in some verses.3 The Strangway-Horners then went to Spa accompanied by Sir Robert Long; they arrived in Venice 'the day after the Ascension',4 Elizabeth then sitting to Rosalba Carriera.5
Lord Strathmore left England for Spain in February 1760 with Thomas Pitt (later Baron Camelford), but soon left him 'on account of his health in Spain'.1 By 4 November 1760 Strathmore had passed through Genoa to Venice.2 In February 1761 he was describing the pleasures of life in Milan where he was finding the women 'greatly inferior to those of Turin, but what they want in Beauty, they make up in Good Will toward men'. Meanwhile hopes of meeting his friend William, Marquess of Titchfield, in Florence were receding.3 In the summer of 1761 he was detained for some time in Parma by the charms of the Countess Sanvitale [Costanza Scotti, c.1736-94, m. 1756 Alessandro Sanvitale] and Thomas Pitt had briefly rejoined him there by 20 June. In August, having 'broken the chain that held him so long', Strathmore came to Florence, asking Horace Mann where Pitt then was.4 By 17 October he had set out for Rome,5 where he stayed some two weeks before paying a brief visit to Naples with Pitt.6 They left Naples on 1 November7 and returned to Rome, Pitt then proceeding straight home.  Strathmore spent the winter in Rome, sharing the tutelage of the Abbé Grant with Sir William and Lady Stanhope between November 1761 and January 1762. Grant said Strathmore left Rome on 5 January to return to England, but he evidently changed his mind.8 James Adam described Strathmore mediating in a row between the Abbé and Robert Mackinlay concerning the architectural merits of the Adam brothers and Robert Mylne,9 and Strathmore was also patronising British artists in Rome. By 3 February 1762 Nathaniel Dance was painting his whole-length portrait (a half-length version is at Glamis Castle), describing him as 'a Scotch Nobleman of very considerable fortune & one of the most good natur'd genteel Gentlemen I ever saw'; he was then 'very much my friend, & has promised me all the service in his power'.10 In February 1762 Strathmore's generous patronage of James Nevay began, with commissions for two large history pieces and an annual retainer, see Nevay. In March Richard Lyttelton noticed that Strathmore had 'taken a violent prejudice against poor Jenkins from the lyes had been told him by the Abbé Grant and others, and his Lordship's evil reports among others had done him much harm'.11  By 10 April he had spent some time in Parma waiting, according to Mann, for a passport to travel home through France.12 But again he changed his mind, for in June he was near Florence with the Countess Sanvitale; in August they were at the baths at Lucca, Strathmore then intending to call on Mann before returning home.13 But on 9 October he was still in Parma; on 27 November the Abbé Grant decided Strathmore would be spending the winter in Parma,14 and in May 1763 Mann wearily told Walpole 'I have often told you that your letters were in the hands of Lord Strathmore, and he in the hands of the Countess San Vital. However, he is now set off for England'.15 Strathmore ('milord Stramon Scozzese') had then already spent four days in Venice from 6 to 9 April,16 and he was back in England by 30 June.17



Strickland was born at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, where his father was vice-chamberlain to Mary of Modena in the exiled Stuart Court. He went out to Italy as tutor to the Pretender's younger son, Henry (later Cardinal York), but he did not find favour.1 In May 1737 he was accompanying Charles Stuart, the Young Pretender, through Bologna and Lombardy.2 In 1744 he left Italy with Charles and fought with him in Scotland in 1745-6.
Sir George travelled in Italy with his wife and two daughters (one was Elizabeth, who m. 1781 her cos., Strickland Freeman, and d. 1821). They were in Genoa in November 1778, and sailed to Lerici with the Crawfurds early in December.1 They were in Naples in January 1779 and visited Paestum with Freeman and John Soane in February.2 They left Rome early in April 1779,3 having bought an inlaid marble table from James Byres and numerous other objects from Thomas Jenkins. Strickland's correspondence concerning these acquisitions survives,4 together with the bills relating to their dispatch to Yorkshire - probably 'one of the most complete records of its kind' (RBF).  The archive includes a receipt signed by Francesco Piranesi for prints of statues and the Antichita di Pesto (by his father G.B. Piranesi), and there is a signed receipt from Carlo Labruzzi for five pictures and four drawings. Strickland's marbles included a Juno, found in 1777 at the Tor Tre Teste, a head of Brutus (acquired subsequently from Jenkins in 1782), and a vase from the Villa Mattei.5 A number of pastes and sulphurs were bought from Alessandro Cades (whose shop was in the Piazza di Spagna). A drawing of Cardinal Casali's mosaic pavement was used by Lady Strickland and her daughters as a carpet pattern; shell bracelets and vellum ('skins') to draw on were bought for the young ladies. Jenkins's letters date from 1779 to 1782 and are not free from self-advertisement. There is further correspondence between Sir George and Charles Townley concerning the mistaken delivery to Boynton Hall of some of Townley's marble statues.
A sensible good-natured man, who seems concerned for the good and quiet of his country and for the good of the Roman Catholics themselves', he was in Rome in 1717 seeking Papal approval for English Catholics to take an oath of loyalty to the Hanoverian Kings of England.1 'Thomas Strickland Coady. [co-adjutor] Doctor de Sorbone' was in Padua sometime between March and May 1717,2 and 'D.Tomaso Strielklam' was staying by the Strada Paolina in Rome at Easter that year.3 As Bishop of Namur he was again in Rome in 1733, his mission apparently concealing some diplomatic intent.


Strode made the grand tour in France, Flanders and Holland in 1730-2, but it appears he was also in Italy. Captain Wood was apparently his governor (although his charge was described as a younger brother; see Wood). 'Strowde' (and a Smith) was in Florence sometime between August 1732 and April 1733.1 On 22 April 1733 in Rome Grisell Baillie received 4 crowns 'to Mr Strods contribution'.2 On 22 June Martin Folkes in Venice noted 'Stroud' and Smith, two 'English Gentlemen just arrived here from Rome and last Bologna',3 and Strode and Smith, 'young gentlemen who are travelling' left Venice for Paris in mid-July.4
Mr and Mrs Strode were in Venice from 18 to 27 May 1779,1 and in October Mrs G. Strode wrote from Aix to Mrs John Strange, the wife of the British resident at Venice, referring to her earlier visit with her husband to Venice.2 'Mons Strod e moglie' were in Venice on 15 February 1781, perhaps the same.1

After 1784 he spent much of his time in historical research, consulting Scottish archives in Paris and Rome for his Genealogical History of the House of the Stewarts [1798].1 In Rome his marble bust was carved by Hewetson (n.d., Signet Library, Edinburgh). He was conceivably the 'Milord Andrea Stuard' with 'Guviney'[?] and 'Amilton' in Venice on 29 May 1789.2

Presumably also the 'Archibaldus Stemaot fil. q. Gualterij' registered at Padua University on 9 October 1726, and the 'Archibaldus Steruaot[?] fil. Archibaldi[?] scotus' who registered on 18 September 1727 (Andrich 182-3).

The favourite son of the 3rd Earl of Bute, Charles Stuart accompanied his father to Italy in 1768-9. He was reported to have a very good taste in architecture,1 and in Rome he began a revised plan, which was finished at Genoa, for Luton Hoo .2  He returned to Italy because of his wife's poor health in 1782, and was considering the purchase of Strange's office of British resident at Venice.3 His wife was possibly the Mrs Stuart in Nice in February 1783.4 Two letters from Colonel Stuart in northern Italy in 1785 to his wife are recorded.5
On hearing of her father's marriage Charlotte came to Rome with her mother in May 1773 to publicise their difficulties, both financial and social. Their visit was brief and inconsequential.1 In 1784 her father, decrepit and deserted by his wife, persuaded her to join him in Florence, and in December 1785 they came together to Rome to live in the Palazzo Muti. Lord Grey de Wilton thought she had 'a good person and is lively; rather handsome than pretty',2 as seen in her portrait by H.D. Hamilton of c.1785-8 (SNPG and Dalmeny). On her father's death in 1788 she sold the Palazzo Guadagni in Florence and was much in the company of her uncle, Cardinal Henry, then the titular Henry IX, at Rome and Frascati. But she had long been suffering from a cancer of the liver and her final months were spent in anxious pursuit of a cure; she died in Bologna on 17 November 1789.

Having worked in London with the decorative artist Lewis Goupy, Stuart set out in 1742 for Rome to study art and learn languages.1 He is said to have walked much of the way, and to have earned his living as an itinerant fan painter in Venice and other cites with Matthew Nulty.2 He may also have acted as a cicerone in Rome, where he met Revett, from whom 'Mr Stuart first caught the ideas of [architecture], in which (quitting the painter's art), he afterwards made so conspicuous a figure'.3 (It has recently been supposed that he may have been the 'Stewart'/'Stuart' whom Richard Pococke met in Naples in December 1740, see George Belsches). Stuart's erudition and his growing ability as an engraver were shown by his publication in Rome in 1750 of the De obelisco Caesaris Augusti e Campe Martio nuperrime effosso / Epistola Jacopi Stuart Angli ad Carolum Wentworth, Comite de Malton; this was subsidised by Pope Benedict XIV, to whom Stuart was presented. It is curious that James Russel told his father in November 1749 that Stuart and Revett were 'not in the least vers'd, either in the Latin or Greek languages'.4 For further details, see Nicholas Revett.
Colonel Stuart and his wife travelled with their daughters Mary (d. 1855) and Louisa Harcourt. They were in Naples by 5 December 1794,1 and were next in Rome, where Cardinal G.F. Albani gave them a letter of introduction, dated 28 March 1795, to his nephew Prince Albani in Milan.2 On 13 May 1795 'Millord Stuard, Consorte e 2 Figli' were in Venice.3 In August 1795 Lady Plymouth wrote that they were, or had recently been, in Rome.4  He was, possibly, the James Stuart whom Adam Ferguson had met in Munich by March 1793,5 and the 'Giacomo Stuardo' in Verona on 20 April 1794.6
Mr Stewart of Bute' was listed in the entourage of the Pretender in March 1733,1 and was described misleadingly as the 3rd Earl of Bute's brother by Alexander Cunningham,2  He was possibly the John 'Stewart' who attended the Jacobite Lodge in Rome between 16 September 1735 and 20 August 1737.3 He died in Rome and was buried in the Scots College with a monument (for which there is a sketch in the Scots College MSS, CA 3, f.26).
Sir William was at Lyons in July 1731,1 and by February 1739 had been living in Venice with a Catholic Venetian wife for 'about four years past'. He was then described as 'Sir William Stuart Baronet of the family of the Stuarts of Castle-milk in North-Britain and a Protestant'; his wife had been arrested under false pretences but was released through the intervention of the British consul.2 Spence met 'Sir W Stuart' with a Mr Smith [Edward Smythe] in Venice in June 1741.3 The Stuarts were still in Venice in August 1744.4 Portraits of him and his wife of c.1740 probably painted in Venice, remain in a private collection.

A young man of twenty five years old, who had always applied himself very much to study and reflection',1 he was sent to Geneva to study under Paul Henri Mallet and was subsequently allowed to visit Italy, where his elder brother John, Viscount Mountstuart, was British envoy in Turin. He presented William at Court on 19 December 1779 with Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke).2 In a letter to his father, dated Turin, 28 March 1780, William recorded his interest in natural history.3 He visited Rome before returning alone to England.1
After spending about a year in Naples, 'Madama Stuarda inglese' arrived at Rome in May 1795, staying at Margherita's hotel (Diario Ordinario, 9 May 1795).

Stubbs was staying in Rome in the Piazza di Spagna ('verso il Bastianello') at Easter 1754,1 the only firm date of his Italian visit. He was back in Liverpool in 1755, when he signed and dated a portrait of James Stanley (Liverpool). It has been suggested that his Lincolnshire patron Lady Nelthorpe may have subsidized his trip,2 but this remains speculative.  Some forty years after Stubbs's visit Ozias Humphry compiled his rambling MS Memoir of 'The Life of Mr. Stubbs', from conversations with the artist.3 Stubbs told Humphry that in Rome he found William Chambers, Thomas Jenkins, Matthew Brettingham, Richard Wilson, [Gavin] Hamilton and Simon Vierpyl (all were there between 1753-4, except Gavin Hamilton who had left early in 1750 to return in 1756). Stubbs mentioned having 'accompanied the Students in Rome to view the Palaces of the Vatican, Borghese Colonna &c & consider the pictures in Rome', only to add that 'he always found himself differing from them in opinion'. Humphry recorded that 'Stubbs Motive for going thither was to convince himself that nature was & is always superior to art whether Greek or Roman, & having renew'd this conviction he immediately resolvd upon returning home'. Humphry noted that 'it does not appear that whilst he [Stubbs] resided in Rome he ever Copied one picture or ever design'd one subject for an Historical Composition, nor did he make one drawing or Model from the Antique'. But Stubbs's long preoccupation with the theme of a horse attacked by a lion almost certainly dates back to his visit to Rome, where he would have seen at the Palazzo dei Conservatori the large marble Lion Attacking a Horse, already familiar to English visitors through Jonathan Richardson's Account.

The period spent by Sturgis in Italy was succinctly described by the diarist Joseph Farington: Margaret, Lady Walpole (later Countess of Orford), 'in several instances solicited men. She went to the bedroom of a Mr Sturges, who had places under Sir Robert Walpole [her father-in-law, the Prime Minister]. She carried him abroad; he lost his places; she grew tired of him, and ... [he became] poor and unprovided for'.1 Horace Walpole, Lady Orford's unaffectionate nephew, told the same tale: 'having had the greatest obligations to Lord Walpole, [Sturgis] went abroad with his wife under pretence of her health; for some time was in personal intimacy with her, but at length turned off for others, only enjoyed a miserable pension from her'.2  Sturgis's affair with Lady Walpole appears to have begun in Italy in 1736 and it ended in 1741 (see Margaret, Countess of Orford). In February 1741 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu observed his face was that of a 'lover kicked out of of doors; and I pity his good heart, at the same time I despise his want of spirit',3 and though he was lodging in Lady Walpole's house in June, in July he 'was sent' from Florence to Leghorn on his own, while Lady Walpole went off to Venice.4 In July 1742 Horace Mann explained that Sturgis had been kicked out for some villanies, involving debts which Lady Walpole's new lover, the comte de Richecourt, had helped to settle.5 Sturgis remained in Italy 'in a sort of despair' until his death in Florence on 31 March 1743.6
In February 1738 'Mr Sturrock who has long liv'd among [the Gentlemen of Lucca]' told George Langton that 'there are about half a Dozen that have been in England & understand our Language'.1  A Mr Sturrock, probably the same and provisionally identified as William Sturrock (d. 1765), was acting as tutor to Lord Beauchamp who died in Bologna in September 1744, see George, Viscount Beauchamp; thereafter he was provided for by Lord and Lady Hertford.2

Lord Sudley had arrived in Florence by 10 January 1767, and on the 24th he had been presented to the Grand Duke.1 He is next recorded at Naples on 15 November 1768.2 He was travelling with his first wife, very probably for the sake of her health, and she was to be remembered in Naples for her 'humanity, generosity, and every virtue'.3 They were in Florence in October and November 1769, and after passing the winter at Pisa were briefly back in Florence in March 1770. Lady Sudley was a favourite with the Grand Duchess in Florence, wrote Horace Mann, 'though she left off when she pleased, and even refused the royal invitation when engaged to another party'.4 She sat to Hewetson for an undated marble bust (priv. coll.) and, with her husband, to Batoni for a portrait dated 1769 (Clark/Bowron 335; priv. coll.). Lady Sudley died in Dublin, soon after their return, on 23 November 1770 (CP).


The Mr Sullivan 'just arrived' in Leghorn on 25 November 1779 and identified as one of the Sullivan brothers, John or Benjamin,1 was probably the 'Mr De Sullivan' presented at Court in Turin on 7 November.2 He had arrived in Rome by 1 January 1780 with Charles Boughton Rouse, and his friend John Hippisley introduced them to the painter Thomas Jones.3 Sullivan advised Hippisley on his proposed Indian expedition and was the only witness of Hippisley's marriage to Margaret Stewart in Rome early in March; on 7 March he was to leave 'in a few day's time'.
They were in Venice on 5 December 1789,1 and in May 1790 went on a trip to Leghorn from Florence with James Clitherow.2 Stephen Sullivan at Leghorn subscribed to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave in 1790.

Possibly the 'Jeremias Silivan' who passed through Capua on 11 March 1753 with 'Mellord Tallow' [Robert Talbot?] (ASN cra 1257).Sullivan attended the dinner at Florence on 21 October 1768 celebrating Horace Mann's investiture as Knight of the Bath,1 and he was in Naples on 13 December when William Hamilton acknowledged Horace Mann's letter of introduction ('he is very clever and has a most ingenious poetical turn').2 He was possibly the Sullivan who was paid by Sir Watkin Williams Wynn on 30 December 1768 for having a copy of a picture made in Florence and bringing it to England,3 and the 'Steven Solivan di Lorenzo' who arrived at Venice on 13 November 1769.4


Lord Sunbury was in Rome by mid-February 1738, when he was telling stories to Lancelot Allgood and George Sinclair.1 He was expected in Naples on 12 March 1738.2
Lord Sunderlin was seen in Rome between December 1785 and April 1786 by Henry Quin, who listed his name alongside that of Lord Crawford [George, 22nd Earl of Crawford].1 Lord and Lady Sunderlin were seen by Lord Grey de Wilton at Montpellier in January 1788.2
On 29 January 1702 Captain 'Sourdeville' dined with Robert Sharpe and Mr Quirk in Rome.1 Mr Surdeville was ill in Rome in June and July 1711.2 Captain James Surdeville of Dublin made his will in Rome, dated Rome 6 January 1713.3
Having shown a particular aptitude for drawing, Robert Surtees was sent to Italy by an uncle, George Surtees of Mainsforth Hall but, 'being more addicted to pleasure than to study did not, it seems, make the best use of his opportunities'.1 He arrived in Rome in 1755,2 and he was in Florence in January 1759.3 A Roman sketchbook of his was with his descendants in 1955 and some of his small paintings were sold in 1983 (Christie's, 28 Jan.).
Captain Sutherland was given leave from the garrison of Gibraltar to make a Mediterranean cruise with a friend, and he described his expedition in A Tour up the Straits, from Gibraltar to Constantinople [1790] (written in the form of letters). Leaving Gibraltar on 7 August 1787, they reached Naples a month later and stayed for three weeks. They were entertained by Lord (John) and Lady Hervey and the anglophile Princess Belmonte who had a room in her casino 'entirely furnished in the English style, with the best productions of Bunbury, Hamilton and Strange'. Sutherland also explored the area around Naples, Virgil in his hand. On their return they came to Leghorn on 21 February 1788. After fifteen days of quarantine they made a brief visit to Florence before sailing to Naples in the first week of April. His comments on works of art were of a personal nature: Titian's Venus in Florence was 'full of languishing desire, but free from lascivious wantonness', but his Danae in Naples might be improved 'for Jupiter's sake ... if her knees were less drawn up'. He carefully measured the Venus de Medici for a brother officer. Sutherland visited Palermo and witnessed the funeral of Prince Pallagonia (whose grotesque villa at Bagheria had always attracted attention). In May 1788 Sutherland was in Smyrna and his last two letters are from Constantinople in January 1789.




He sat to Mengs, the portrait dated 1753 and inscribed Robt Sutton.A.D.L.III / at. SUAE XXVII (Sotheby's, 9 Nov. 1994), and he was presumably the Mr Sutton staying in Rome at Easter 1754 near S.Bastianello (AVR SA, S.Lorenzo in Lucina). He may also have been the Mr Sutton who passed through Capua on 4 December 1753 (ASN cra 1257).


Separated from her husband who was an English diplomat, she was said to be the lover of one Agostino Carli-Rubbi (probably in Milan).1 She had left Rome by December 1777.2
An Anglican clergyman who had converted to Rome, he came to Leghorn with a Mr Thomson in May 1732. Francis Colman reported he was said to be a Doctor of the Sorbonne: he was 'entirely at the Pretender's devotion', was 'about 40, middle sized, thin swarthy complexion, talkative, & affects much pedantick terms' (SP 98/33, 27 May 1732).

Mr and Mrs Swinburn had been living at Aix in 1766 where they met Robert Grimston (who was there from January to October that year); together they went to Turin where they had arrived by 1 January 1767, when Grimston described Mrs Swinburn as having been 'like a mother'. Grimston went on to attend the Academy at Turin, and in August he visited the Swinburns for two or three days (but it is not clear where, perhaps in Aix). Between April and June 1768 Grimston spent three very agreeable weeks with 'Mrs Swinburn's brother Mr Hobart' in Venice (Grimston letters MSS, 1 Jan. 1767, 22 Aug. 1767, 22 Jun. 1768).
Between 8 May and 6 June Sir Edward Swinburne was in Venice,1 where he 'had a very severe fit of the Gout'.2 He was in Rome by 29 June,3 and left about the end of August 'very well' and proposing to be in England 'by the end of September'.2 James Byres had given him William Constable's portrait in cameo by Pichler 'to be delivered to Mr Dunn in London'.2 According to his account at Coutts's bank two cases were sent to him from Leghorn in March and April 1773,4 probably commissions he had left.
There were two Swinburnes in Naples in the winter of 1792-3, listed as 'Mr Swinburne' and 'Mr Hy. Swinburne'.1 Henry Swinburne (1772- 1800) is separately noticed, and the first was apparently his cousin Edward.  'Mr Swinburne frequently accompanies us in our morning excursions', wrote John Carr in Rome in January 1792, 'and is of great use, being personally known to most of [the English artists]'.2 'Mr Edward Swinburne', who had previously been in Naples, was noticed in Rome on 1 April 17933 (and Henry Swinburne had also come to Rome by April 1793).  At Naples in 1797 William Artaud was with 'a most able designer of landscape', the younger brother of Sir John Swinburne.4 He was evidently a close friend of Artaud with whom he may have visited Paestum as 'a topographer', with Henry Thomson, Duppa and Reinagle in 1797, sometime before June6 (but Sir William Hamilton had called him Henry Swinburne, perhaps in error7). In 1804, three years after the death of Henry Swinburne, Farington met a Mr Swinburne, brother of Sir John Swinburne of Northumberland, who drew landscape well and had been in Italy where he had found 'that reckoning from the Alps, - it included every character of Landscape in the highest perfection'.5
A Catholic educated in France, Swinburne was first in Italy completing his studies at the Academy of Turin (DNB). In 1763, having come into independent means on the death of his elder brother, he returned to Italy, visiting Turin, Genoa and Florence, learning Italian and studying virtù (DNB). He was doubtless the Swinburne whom Gibbon met in Florence in June 1764 and who had left by 8 July for England, intending to return before the winter.1 On his return journey he met in Paris Martha Baker, a fellow Catholic then studying at the Ursuline convent, adept at languages, musical and interested in the fine arts. They were married at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1767 (although it is difficult not to believe they were the Mr and Mrs Swinburn whom Robert Grimston met at Aix in 1766). After spending some time on the Swinburne estate at Hamsterley, they left in February 1774 for France, thereafter spending much of their life in European travel with their growing family. In the autumn of 1775 Swinburne left his wife and family in Bayonne to tour Spain with his friend and fellow Catholic Sir Thomas Gascoigne. They returned in June 1776 and that autumn they all sailed from Marseilles to Naples, where they arrived on 28 December. Swinburne described their Italian experiences principally in his Travels in the Two Sicilies 1777-80 [1783-5], and in letters subsequently published (but poorly edited, leaving exact dates questionable) as The Courts of Europe at the close of the last Century (Swinburne, Courts, 1; page references in brackets).  On 16 January 1777 Swinburne was describing their apartments on the Chiaia and enthusing over Naples: 'nothing can be gayer than the town, nor kinder than we find its inhabitants' (122). Swinburne's informal letters (most addressed to his brother and father-in-law) pay as much attention to social amusements as to descriptions of sights. He saw his eldest boy, 'Little Harry' doffing his cap to the King of Naples and observed that the King himself was 'boyish and romping' (131), while his Queen was rather mean, superstitious and not very attractive, though she was to be kind to the Swinburne children, being godmother of their daughter Carolina. He contrasted the public works undertaken by the King-an incomplete road to Posillipo-with those of his father which included the aqueduct, the great hospital, palaces at Portici and Caserta, excavations at Herculaneum and Pompeii, and the Strada Nuova and the Molo in Naples. But now, he wrote, 'All ranks seem to live only for tawdry show and idleness', and 'the rich are oppressed with debts' (158). Their own lives were well occupied with the rituals of society. They frequently saw Lady Orford and Lord Tylney, while the entertaining Abbé Galiani accompanied them on their villeggiatura in Vietri. There were many excursions 'delightfully amusing and interesting; for, except in taking views, my wife has the same propensities as myself for antiquities, and our mode of life is so pleasant in this delicious climate ... that it is impossible for me to express how agreeably the time passes' (141). Swinburne was an accomplished amateur artist and several of the plates in his Travels were engraved from his drawings.  In contrast to the letters, Swinburne's Travels presents a comprehensive history and travel guide to the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. His descriptions of the country are 'enthusiastic', as he once explained, 'since all is interesting to one who delights in taking views from Nature' (314). His account was largely derived from excursions made from Naples with Gascoigne in 1777, the most ambitious being to Taranto and Reggio in April and May 1777, covering the southern part of the Kingdom. The 'cooler days of the ensuing summer and autumn' were devoted to the exploration of the environs of Naples - Caserta, Ischia, Lake Avernus, Pozzuoli - before going in September to Paestum and Amalfi. Early in December he revived his project of visiting Sicily; they had been intending to go to Rome, but Mrs Swinburne's health 'not permitting her to move', Swinburne and Gascoigne set out for a two-month tour of the island (179-98; Travels, 2:169-421). In January 1778 they sailed back from Messina to Tropea and rode through Calabria to Naples, where they arrived on 13 February. At the end of the Carnival they went to Rome for Holy Week. Swinburne and Gascoigne were presented to the Pope, Pius VI, but the Abbé Grant 'who conducted us, talked so much, that the pope could not get in a word'. A few days later Mrs Swinburne and the children were separately presented, the children duly kissing his foot. Pius VI, Swinburne added, was very proud of his legs and feet and wore his gown short to show them off. From Easter Monday Gascoigne and Swinburne followed a course of antiquities with James Byres. With James Mackenzie and his wife Lady Betty, Dutens and the Abbé Grant, they made an excursion to Tivoli and Frascati where they saw Cardinal York 'an ugly foolish-looking, long-visaged fellow, very like his grandfather, full of pride, and just such another obstinate bigot' (209); he was conducting a mass and asked the ladies to remove their hats, which Mrs Swinburne resolutely declined to do. On another visit to Tivoli, undertaken to give his eldest daughter Martha 'a change of air', Swinburne remarked upon Horace's villa near Licenza. In August the Swinburnes had been attending the Abbé Waters who was ill in Rome,2 but then on 8 September 1778 their eldest child Martha died.  The 'dreadful loss of my angelic child' (222) was only partly offset by a most sympathetic letter to Mrs Swinburne from the Queen of Naples who had also just lost a child. Swinburne went alone to stay for a few days with Count Gastaldi at Monte Rotondo 'fifteen miles up the Tyber' (224) and made an excursion to Terni with Gascoigne. He commissioned a monument in memory of Martha from Christoper Hewetson (the long inscription offending Father Thorpe, since it made no mention of religion3) which was placed in the English College in Rome. According to Father Thorpe the Swinburnes were then left with 'two others of their children',4 presumably Fanny (Mary Frances (1771-1826) and Harry (1772-1800). It was perhaps the commissioning of Martha's monument which led the Swinburnes to sit to Hewetson themselves for bust portraits (bronzes now at Lotherton Hall) and they also sat to Batoni for half-length portraits (Clark/Bowron 414-15), his dated 1779 (Laing AG, Newcastle), hers undated (priv. coll.). Gascoigne also sat to Batoni at the same time for a whole-length (Lotherton) which shows in the background the Swinburne busts (Swinburne observed that Batoni's daughter Ruffina 'a beautiful girl, has a divine voice' [211]). In February 1779 Gascoigne bought for the Swinburnes the Petroni collection of medals from Naples and in return they gave him the relief by Thomas Banks of Alcyone which they won in a raffle, see Banks.  Swinburne's letters describe visiting the Vatican by torch-light with some Russians, collating texts of Horace for Galiani in the Vatican Library (234) and mention the excavation by Irish Dominicans of a column of Giallo Antico at Santo Sisto (227). The music they heard in Italy remained disappointing; in Naples Swinburne had said that there was 'no place where music seems to be in less esteem' (161) and in Rome he described attending the opera Adriano in Siria at the Argentina, 'the music bad the theatre dirty, old, and dark, with a great show of diamonds in the boxes' (226). But he heard Nardini, 'the first violin player in the world' (211). On 6 March 1779 Swinburne set out on a short tour with Gascoigne to the Abruzzi where, he wrote, the antiquary and the naturalist may travel 'with exquisite pleasure and profit; the former will find treasures of inscriptions, and inedited monuments', while 'the natural philosopher will have a noble field for observation on the stupendous mountains that rise on all sides' (Travels, 2:510, 515).  In April 1779 the Swinburnes returned to Naples,5 but that same month Mrs Swinburne's father died and Henry decided to return to England, leaving his wife and children in Naples.6 He apparently returned with Gascoigne (who left Rome on 17 April and was in London by July). After passing through Rome and Florence, Swinburne described the Campo Santo frescos at Pisa which, although 'infinitely short of the perfection [of] Raphael ... have great merit in the airs of the heads, and also in the whimsical ideas they have introduced'7-an exceptional interest in one whose taste was generally traditional (he had referred, for example, to 'the barbarous taste of Borromini's school' in Rome, 235). At Lucca, 'the prettiest little toy of a commonwealth imaginable', he had 'scarce ever felt greater satisfaction than that I enjoyed at the air of plenty, riches, and content, this little land wears; it is the emblem of real liberty' (254-5). At Genoa he sketched the lighthouse by stealth 'for nobody is allowed to make drafts of any part of Genoa' (257). He stayed at the Auberge Royale at Turin, where he observed the the Prince of Piedmont 'thin and sickly', his wife 'as fat as butter, very merry and good-natured', but the Queen was 'totally withered and worn out' (264). Swinburne reached London by July 1779 and stayed until February 1780. He then returned to Italy through Turin and Parma, where he was depressed by what he saw; the Duchy was ruled by a 'fat fool', his Archduchess Maria Amelia was 'a very bad paymistress' and they lived in a pitiful palace, du Tillot's ambitious plans having been laid aside through jealous motives. Swinburne went on through Modena, Rimini, Loreto and Rome, rejoining his family in Naples early in May (but probably sooner). Mrs Swinburne meanwhile had found favour with Queen Carolina of Naples and when her daughter was born in September 1779 she was named after the Queen.8 When she finally left Naples with her husband in May 1780, the Queen gave her a pair of diamond bracelets, with her picture and ciphers, and two fine medals. The Swinburnes were in Rome by 17 May 1780,9 Henry then receiving another audience with the Pope during which they conversed in Italian. They went on to Florence, staying at 'Mrs Hadfield's' [Megit's] until the middle of June. At the opera Swinburne showed his wife the Young Pretender, asleep by the end of the first act, 'being generally intoxicated'; there, commented Swinburne, was the 'undeserving object of all her Jacobitical adoration' (249, 251). He was more appreciative of English society in Florence (Lady Orford, the Cowpers, Lord Tylney) which appeared to be 'on a pleasant footing', without 'opposition sets, which, among the English, is too often the case. Sir Horace Mann's keeping open house is probably a preventive, being a sort of centre, or point de reunion' (250). Mann entrusted to Swinburne a piece of rock crystal for Horace Walpole.10 On 10 June Swinburne wrote that they intended leaving Florence 'in a day or two for Vienna, through Bologna, and I have agreed with a Mantuan vetturino to take us with thirteen horses to Bologna, nine to Vienna, including all expenses for eating, lodging, &c., for us, our children, and five servants; - the price two hundred sequins, - about twenty too much' (252). They were in Vienna by October, but they did not reach London until the following July.
Henry Swinburne had been with his parents in Italy in 1776-80 and was later in Paris, where he became a royal page at the French court. He returned to London in March 1792, then in September, aged twenty, he returned to Naples in the care of the Abbé Campbell.1 In Naples during the winter of 1792-3 he met Thomas Pelham (later 2nd Earl of Chichester) and on 1 April 1793 they accompanied Lady Plymouth and Lady Webster to Benevento.2 He was with Pelham at Florence in June and they left together on the 23rd for Genoa and Turin; by 7 July they were in the Val d'Aosta.3 Swinburne apparently returned to Italy and stayed in Naples until the approach of the French armies 'rendered it prudent for Englishmen to quit Italy'.4 Emma Hamilton talked much in praise of Harry's beauty, and said he was run after by all the ladies in Naples; she lamented his refusal to marry the marchesa Moscate, which would have been 'a splendid match in point of fortune'.5 See also Edward Swinburne, with whom Henry has occasionally been confused.
Swiney left the Haymarket theatre in January 1713 after the second performance of Handel's Teseo, his company and the theatre in debt (although the debts were apparently repaid).1 He lived in France and in Italy (he had already translated libretti from both those languages), and was first noticed in Rome, 'Swinny yt was a sort of director of ye play house' in July 1715;2 at Easter 1716 'Eugenio Souini Inglese heretico' was living in the parish of S.Andrea delle Fratte. On 13 June 1716 'Eugenio Swinny' was in Padua,3 and on 14 September he was enrolled at the University; he was again in Padua on 24 June 1721, in March 1722 (when he was said to be returning to England with Thomas Bourchier4) and September 1726. By this time it would appear that Swiney had settled in Venice, where he was to operate during the next ten years as an impresario, commissioning and handling paintings for sale in England and obtaining singers and libretti for the Italian opera in London. Sometime before 1722 he had lived in consul Joseph Smith's house in Venice where he had learned a little about accounting, and Smith evidently helped him at times in his finances.5 By 1721 he was acting in Venice as an agent for Rosalba Carriera with British travellers; he paid her for Brodrick's portrait in August 1725.6 He promoted the young Canaletto, though he was dubious of his talent and temperament: 'of Twenty pieces I see of him I don't like eighteen ... He's a covetous, greedy fellow', Swiney told a client, John Conduitt, in 1730.7 He was also collecting pictures for sale; in June and July 1724 he was in Vienna selling pictures he had collected in Italy.8 A great deal of his energy went in the commissioning of a remarkable series of large allegorical paintings by 'the most celebrated Painters in Italy', commemorating great men of recent English history.9 By 1726 fifteen such paintings had been started; each was to contain an urn 'wherein is supposed to be deposited the Remains of the deceas'd Hero', while the architectural settings alluded to 'the Virtues, to the Imployments, or to the Learning and Sciences of the Departed'. Swiney devised the subject matter, and commissioned some fifteen artists (mostly from Venice and Bologna) to contribute figures, architecture and landscape to the twenty-four subjects. Ferraiuoli, Cimaroli and Mirandolese probably received the most work, but other painters included Piazzetta, Pittoni, Canaletto, Imperiali and Sebastiano and Marco Ricci. The results were spectacular capricci whose intended purpose, however, remained obscure. The 2nd Duke of Richmond acquired at least ten for Goodwood (where Vertue saw them in 1747), and in 1729 Swiney said that Sir William Morice bought fifteen pieces for 1,500 gns.; the series is now dispersed.10 Swiney eventually had nine of them engraved in the Tombeaux des Princes [1741], though his intention had been to print all 24 'Sepulchral Pieces'. There had also been a second comparable series of six paintings intended for Lord Cadogan, Richmond's father-in-law, celebrating the achievements of the Duke of Marlborough; these were being discussed in 1723 but nothing is heard of them thereafter.11  The Duke of Richmond was also much involved with Swiney's musical activities in Venice.12 In April 1724 Nicolo Francesco Haym, secretary of the Royal Academy of Music in London, asked Swiney to keep the Academy informed concerning operatic productions in Italy, in return for a reasonable salary. Swiney agreed but, not being a friend of Haym, he chose to do so through a series of letters addressed to the Duke of Richmond (who became a deputy governor of the Academy in 1726).13 There was also friction with the Italian singers already in London but it was through Swiney that the alto castrato Baldi and the tenor Antinori sang in London, as well as the celebrated soprano Faustina (with whom he had agreed terms in August 1725).14 He was unable to get the young Farinelli who wished to stay in Italy to study 'the Lombard manner'. Swiney also advised on libretti: Stampiglia's Partenope, for example, should not be considered: it only succeeded in Italy because of 'a depravity of taste of the audiences'. He unsuccessfully recommended the Valeriani brothers as scene painters. The Academy was dissolved in mid- 1728, and it appears unlikely that Swiney ever recovered his expenses for the copying and sending of libretti to London. In March 1729 he had met Handel in Bologna looking for a new company of singers; in October that year his corrrespondence with the Duke of Richmond comes to an end. In the summer of 1730 he was travelling in Italy with Lord Boyne and Edward Walpole; they were in Bologna in July, about to go briefly to Rome before returning to Florence.15 In September he was in Milan, writing that he had been 'out of Venice these three months'.16 In April 1731 Swiney joined Lord Boyne and others on a sea voyage from Venice to Lisbon (see Boyne). Spence saw him in Venice sometime between November 1731 and March 1732.17  He was in Paris in December 173218 and Leiden in March 1733;19 in August 1733 he was thought to be still in Ireland, having spent 'only six days' in London; he was expected back in Venice before the end of the year.20 His subsequent movements between Italy and England are not clear. He appears (as 'D. Milesius Suin anglus') in the register of Padua University in 1734-5 (22 July apparet), 1735-6 (24 November electus), 1736-7 (24 November electus) and 1737-8 (apparet; 'anglicae nationis consiliariorum is ultimus fuit').21 He was in London on 26 February 1735, when he enjoyed a benefit performance at Drury Lane; in May 1736 the directors of the Opera of the Nobility were considering sending Swiney to Italy in search of singers.22 In 1738 he sat to van Loo in London (London art market 1987).  In 1746 he introduced Canaletto in London to the Duke of Richmond.23 He was still acting on Rosalba Carriera's behalf in London at the end of his eventful life, and in his will he directed that his debts to consul Joseph Smith should be settled before the remainder of his estate passed to the actress Peg Woffington.24 His substantial collection of pictures was sold in 1755 (Langford's, 28 Feb.).
Swinton was appointed English chaplain at Leghorn c.1729 (DNB). In June 1731 he returned to England with a subscription list from the merchants at Leghorn 'whereby to raise a sufficient subsistence for his residence as chaplain'.1 Having obtained the King's commission, he returned on 29 July 1732 to Leghorn where he was coolly received by the British consul, Neil Brown, who, he thought, was inimical to the idea of having a chaplain, especially one living in his house. Swinton then saw 'noe greater Probability of exercising my function here at Present than I did a year and a half agoe'.2 Divine service was, however, established. Swinton left Leghorn in February 1734, according to the consul for six months absence.3 He had left Venice by 26 March with Samuel Savage and John Olmius,4 and did not, apparently, return to Leghorn. It was also said Swinton left Leghorn because the climate did not suit his health and that in 1733 he lived in Florence (DNB), where Spence saw a Mr Swinton some time before April 1733.5
In 1752, with his wife and father-in-law, Sir John Astley, Swymmer went to Paris to meet the Young Pretender and discuss plans for the Elibank Plot (involving Prussian help for a restoration of the Stuarts). He went on to Rome with his wife, commended to Lumisden the Pretender's secretary, and had arrived by 16 January 1753.1  Lumisden became rather taken by Mrs Swymmer, escorting her regularly during the Carnival and saying that she had 'all the qualities we admired in the fair sex'.2 Their cicerone was probably James Russel, who recorded their departure in April and said they had been very generous to him;3 he had dedicated a plate to Swymmer in his Letters [1750]. Swymmer patronised Mengs, then at the start of his Roman career, commissioning two pastels (now lost) and he and his wife were apparently Mengs's first English sitters; Mrs Swymmer's beautiful portrait with a Carnival mask in her hand is at Dalmeny, but her husband's is now lost; there was some robust bargaining concerning the price.4 Early in May 1753 the Swymmers had been in Florence, Horace Mann listing 'Mr and Mrs Swimmer, who was a beauty, they say'.5 In September [presumably 1753] Mr Russell [doubtless James Russel] was sending Swymmer 'all your things except the portraits by Myngs and landskips by Wilson [doubtless Richard Wilson], & these are now just sent to Leghorn'.6
Swymmer and Elizeus Burges, the British consul, spent an evening with Martin Folkes in Venice on 5 July 1733.1 This was probably also the Mr Swymmer, English merchant in Venice, met by Pococke in August 1737.2



Symonds was in Italy between 1765 and 1771, probably continuously, though there are gaps in his itinerary in 1768, 1769 and 1770. He was in Genoa early in December 1765,1 and went on to Naples, where Laurence Sterne called him 'a person of learning & Character'. In March 1766 he was in Rome about to return through Paris to London.2 At the end of May 1767 'Gio: Simons' came to Florence from Bologna and had an audience with the Grand Duke;3 'Symonds di Nazione Inglese' was elected to the Accademia del Disegno in Florence on 6 June 1767.4 Early in 1769 Mr Symonds was in Rome, having made, said William Drake, 'the tour of Italy on horseback, & it is generally thought knows more of this Country than any other Englishman who has gone before him'; the 3rd Earl of Bute had engaged him 'for a companion & run away with him to Naples'.5 The Abbé Grant said that Symonds was of the 'greatest service imaginable' to Lord Bute; 'tis he hitherto who shows [Bute] all the curiositys altho he intends to take a second view of the chief things along with Byres'.6  John Symonds wrote three letters to William Hamilton between March and April 17697 in which period he was still with Lord Bute. He had composed an epitaph for James Macdonald of Sleat (Rome, 7 Mar.); he advised on the best paper for printing, showing he knew James Byres and Robert Strange (n.d., Rome, [Mar.]), and on 1 April he wrote from Genoa, where he had been speaking with Madame Balbi concerning Viscount Fortrose; he had come through Leghorn and Siena, and was to set off next day for Milan, '& after seeing Parma, Mantoua propose to be at Venice about the 24th of this month'. A year later, on 5 April 1770, he wrote from Venice to Paciaudi, the librarian at Parma, where he had evidently just been received by the prime minister du Tillot and had presented some books; a second letter to Paciaudi is dated London, 8 July 1771.8 His close friend Arthur Young said that Dr Symonds (who had given him an introduction to Filippo Neri in Florence) had once travelled with the Bishop of Derry and the Abbé Fortis, implying he was still in northern Italy in May 1771,9 and it appears Symonds had also been in Corsica.10  In 1784, when he was living in Bury St Edmunds, Symonds repeatedly described to the young La Rochefoucauld his long journey to Italy in 1765 made to study agriculture.11



An anonymous travel journal of 1791-2 which includes Italy, may be by Charles Talbot (Staffs RO; S.MS.458) and see Talbot 1792.


Talbot was travelling in Italy with Sir John Rous. They were presented at Court in Florence in November 1772, and on the 15th they joined Thomas Orde at Siena.1 Talbot and Rous, with a Mr Foster, were in Capua on their way to (or from?) Naples on 8 January 1773,2 and were in Venice on 7 May 1773.3 Talbot was back in Rome in September,4 and he sat to Batoni for a whole-length portrait that year (Clark/Bowron 368; Getty Museum, Malibu). There is a drawing of Rous by Johann Anton Pichler,5 and Talbot appears with Rous (and others) in a conversation piece attributed to Wickstead painted in Rome c.1773 (Ham House, and priv. coll.).6 Piranesi dedicated a plate to both Talbot and Rous in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778]. John Talbot was in Italy at the same time as Thomas Mansel Talbot, and it is uncertain which was the Talbot listed in Rome ('seguita la Strada verso S.Bastianello') at Easter 1773,7 and which refered to by Timothy Collopy in an undated letter of about January 1773: 'Mr Talbot who is yesterday gone to Rome a second time, ... was much surprized there could be so fine a picture in Rome as yours without his hearing of it'.8

In June 1753 Maria Basset (née Talbot, dau. of James, Lord Talbot) enquired through James Russel 'whether her Brother [Robert Talbot] be now alive at Rome'; James Russel replied in July he could get 'no notice of him'.1 He was conceivably the 'Mellord Tallow' who passed through Capua on 11 March 1753.2

Talbot had passed a year in Geneva before coming to stay at Turin from August 1769 to March 1770.1 But he appears to have made an excursion south in October 1769 when, with Peter King, Richard Malone and a Mr Leighton, 'Talbot' was reported in Florence on the 21st; a week later they were all about to be presented to the Grand Duke.2 On 15 May 1770 Peter King, with 'Tomaso Tuiden'[?] and 'William Talbo' (conceivably in error for T.M. Talbot), arrived in Venice.3  Talbot spent the winter of 1770-1 in Nice, where his sister died. In September 1771 he returned to Italy accompanied by Colonel de Roquin, a Swiss; they came to Milan on 9 September and Patrick Home noticed them there on 6 October.4 From 30 November to June 1772 they were in Rome. John Cotes saw them in Pisa,5 and in July 1772 they sailed from Leghorn to Marseilles. On 16 August they were back in England.  In the course of his second and third visits to Italy Talbot, encouraged by Charles Townley, was purchasing works of art for Penrice Castle on a fairly grand scale. He had 'money enough to supply a total want of Judgements', thought Mrs Home, while her husband cryptically described him as '£7000 a Year in Wales. Awkward-half bred. Dutchess of Beaufort fond'.6 Twenty-three cases of pictures and marbles were shipped from Leghorn to Wales in June 1775, and Talbot's Italian notebook records £7,397 spent on pictures, copies, sculptures, drawings, plans, models, books and chimneypieces. Talbot used as his agents Thomas Jenkins (to whom there is an undated payment of £4,140) and Gavin Hamilton.7 In 1772 he sat to Marsigli for his portrait in miniature, and he commissioned a subject from Mengs for 260 gns. In 1773 he paid Hewetson £68 'in full for my Bust' and £140 for 'A bust of ye Pope' [Clement XIV] (both VAM). Talbot bought the Abbé Dolci's 'entire collection' of sculptures in 1773, and commissioned copies from Cardelli. He also commissioned a Diomede from J.T. Sergel in 1773.9 Talbot acquired paintings from Philipp Hackert in 1772 and 1773 (a commission probably secured by Father Thorpe10) and drawings by Brenna and Stringini in 1773. In 1774 Jenkins mentioned 'a Tintoret that Mr Talbot at first agreed to take' (and presumably did not).11 There are payments of £80 to Valadier 'for the gilt bronze about ye tables' and 100 scudi to Albacini for a chimneypiece in 1773. Father Thorpe later wrote that Talbot received more than one chimneypiece from Rome,12 and some (undated) designs for chimneypieces supplied to Talbot are in the Cooper Hewitt Museum.  Piranesi dedicated a plate to Talbot in the Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778], but he would have been surprised to learn that Talbot's marbles were 'left in packing-cases during the greater part of [his] life'.13 Talbot's collection was finally dispersed at Margam Castle in 1941 (Christie's, 29 Oct.).14 See also John Chetwynd Talbot.
Sir Charles Talbot's son' had arrived in Rome by 21 December 1793.1 He was presumably the Talbot who had gone with John Rushout and Lord Tyrone on an expedition from Turin in October.2 On 3 January 1794 Sarah Bentham dined 'chez Lady Knight & Met Mr Talbot there whom we had known at Spa'.3 Talbot, Rushout and Tyrone were reported (evidently in retrospect) going from Rome to Naples in July 1794 (Rushout was then in Carlsbad, having been in Rome from November 1793 to March 1794).4

A covert Catholic and a dedicated antiquarian, Talman was said to have spent over twenty years abroad, viewing the 'most famous buildings' and forming an extraordinary collection of prints and drawings principally illustrating Italian baroque design. This collection helped his father's profession, but it also represented an attempt to improve English taste so that, as he said, 'Strangers may not say of us, as was said formerly, that we only think of eating & drinking; or as Erasmus hinted, yt. we only dispute about Religion, I wou'd have y world admire us for Polite people in Arts' (4 May 1715).1  Talman was first in Italy between 1699 and 1702.2 He had been in Holland and Germany in 1698 and there is a drawing by him dated Jany.17.Roma 1701 and another of taper staffs from the Gesu Maria, Rome, dated 1702.3 'Gio: Talmar', almost certainly Talman, was living near S.Bastianello in Rome in 1700 and 1701, with 'Gio:Calber'[?].4 He was back in England by 1702.  His second visit in 1709-17 is better documented. It was financed by his father, and was apparently originally undertaken in order to obtain designs for a new royal palace for Queen Anne in Whitehall (12 May 1709). He travelled out with slightly younger companions, the painter William Kent and the architect Daniel Lock. They sailed to Leghorn and spent five months in Florence from November 1709. 'I am now in a Citty yt. abounds w: Arts in all it's branches', wrote Talman; 'I do not mention wht. fine marbles, shaftes of pillars & Statues &c might from time to time be bought for Blenheim ... & more especially for adorning of a noble Palace, Suitable, if Such a one can be built, to ye Greatness of a Qn. who has a soul to do as glorious things in Arts as she has done in Arms abroad' (18 Nov. 1709). In March 1710 he emphasised to Richard Topham in London that he was at the service of the 2nd Duke of Devonshire, the 8th Earl of Pembroke, Lord Somers, and Lord Halifax, and soon he was telling this group of the remarkable Resta collection of drawings which was being sold in Rome; Talman compiled a catalogue of the collection, which was eventually sold to Lord Somers in March 1711.5  In March 1710, to save money, Talman walked to Rome, rejoining Kent and Lock. Every Thursday they would meet together to see 'fine Palaces' (9 May 1710). It would appear that Talman remained based in Rome, (Chetham mentions him there in March 1712, and Kent in November 1714, April 1715, March and June 1716, and in February 1717).6 In May 1711, despite his relatively modest circumstances, Talman provided a St Luke's Feast for the top virtuosi in Rome; 'I had the best musick composed on purpose, and a poem of above four hundred verses compossed for this occasion in praise of arts'. Lord Cornbury was the 'Prince of the Academy' and forty-three attended in richly decorated rooms (6 Jun. 1711). In August 1711 Talman devised, as a suitable commission to be placed by Lord Cornbury, a monumental painting to be executed by Chiari and Trench in Rome on the theme of 'Learning & arts are y chief accomplishments of a Nobleman in order to render himself an ornament to his Country': it was to show Queen Anne receiving a group of grand tourists returning from Italy, surrounded by works of art and led by Minerva, 'Goddess of War, Learning & arts' (15 Aug. 1711). Talman sketched the design (18 Nov. 1711), but no more is heard of the picture. In the same letter Talman was campaigning to prevent Marco Ricci from winning the commission to paint the cupola of St Paul's: 'Rizzi of Venice everyone knows to be no more yan a scene painter'. While Talman remained based in Rome, he made frequent excursions. One of the earliest was in September 1710 when he said he was going to Naples with William Aikman (27 Sep. 1710). Kent reported Talman absent from Rome in November 1712 and June 1713. He was in Padua on 12 February 1713 and in Ravenna the same year (dated drawings at Chatsworth and VAM). He was in Padua again in September 1714, and 'for the fifth time' in August/September 1716.7 He had been in Venice at least in September 1714 (8 Sep. 1714) and 31 May 1715.8 Talman had returned to Florence in January 17119 and he was there again from July to October 1715 (20 Jul., 11 Oct. 1715), when he was sent £340 by the Commissioners for New Churches in London for a statue of Queen Anne. This was a gilt-bronze figure, twice life-size, intended for a site in St Mary-le-Strand; it was designed by G.B. Foggini, a friend of Talman, in 1714 and cast in 1714-15, but its subsequent fate is unknown.10  But throughout his stay in Italy, Talman's most consistent activity was (as his father described it) the collecting of 'the most valuable Collection of Books, Prints, Drawings &c, as in any one persons hands in Europe'.11 'My employmt. is to cause abundance of fine drawings to be made in several Parts of Italy relating to Architecture &c. I have coloured as y. originals to give a lively idea of y Italians gusto' (1710). His letter-book hints at the scale of this activity: 'I have about 70 draweings carrying on for me in several parts of Italy of y most curious things imaginable', and 'I am continually writing, drawing and seeing fine things, & have five men at work for me' (Jan. 1710). It was not always easy to orchestrate such labour, and he once told his Florentine agent, Signor Magnolfi, that 'I am unhappy in ye persons I have employ'd in Pisa and Florence, for they wont work' (13 Jun. 1711). Talman used many Italian artists (they included Santucci, Pietro Santi, Agostino Cornacchini, Francesco Bartoli, Carlo Lera, Giovanni Casoni and Pietro Scacciati), and seems particularly to have favoured Giuseppe Grisoni who, according to Vertue, returned with him to England.12 Talman's catholicism would have helped him to penetrate 'even into the inmost parts of the Vatican treasury',13 and he had access to many distinguished private collections.  There may have been further visits to Italy, according to the evidence of Talman's drawings. One of St Mark's, Venice (Cottonian Collection, Plymouth), is signed I. Talman 1719, and in the album sold in 1993 there were drawings by Talman of St Mark's dated 1719, one of a cloth belonging to the Bishop of Mardin dated Feb.9:1719, a 'Paten of gold' from Monza dated 1723, and two others of 1721 and 1723 illustrating items from S.John Lateran in Rome. At his death there were some 200 albums, described in 1725 as forming a 'Noble & Sumptuous Collection' of drawings 'most things in their full & exact proportion', except the buildings which were to such a scale that the volumes containing them were 'Four feet high & require 2 men to open & shutt them' (DBA). The volumes were sold by Talman's direction on his death, but several are known today; most recently two were sold at Sotheby's (27 Apr. 1989 and 2 Apr. 1993); there are three in the Ashmolean, and one each in the VAM, BMPL, RIBA (dismantled), the Society of Antiquaries and the Courtauld Institute (Witt collection). Many of the architectural drawings Talman acquired remain at Chatsworth, having been bought by Lord Burlington.

A Yorkshire Catholic, Tancred attended the Academy at Turin for two years in 1767-8. He came to Venice in October 1766,1 and was in Turin by the following January.2 He was presumably the 'Tomaso Tancred' who arrived at Venice on 3 May 1768,3 but he appears to have continued at the Academy in Turin until September 1768, when he travelled south, through Parma4 and Florence5 in September and October, to reach Naples by November.6 In April 1769 he visited General Paoli in Corsica with the 10th Earl of Pembroke,7 and then travelled with Pembroke from Florence to Venice in May.8 Father Thorpe was later to observe that Tancred's behaviour in Rome had not promised much good.9


Tasburgh, a Catholic who had studied with Father Thorpe, used the French name Bourneville1 while in Italy. Father Thorpe had been expecting 'Monington & Tassburgh' in Rome in April 1775 (24 Apr. 1775), but it appears Tasburgh was alone when he was reported in Leghorn that September. 'Here is an English gentleman, an old Schoolfellow of yours', wrote Thorpe's correspondent in Leghorn, 'Bourneville, brother in law to Gen. Gage. After the death of his Lady [who, however, had remarried] he fell into a deep melancholly, came into Italy, lived three months privately at Loreto, went over into Palestine & visited divers parts of the Levant, from whence he came hither above three months ago: he is a very sensible gentleman & of excellent parts, much esteemed in Italian as well as in English Company; he is now going to Siena, & from thence to Rome' (2 Sep. 1775). In December 1775 Tasburgh was entertained by Senator Rezzonico (20 Dec. 1775) and in April 1776 (still in Rome) he was 'a great favourite at Gloster house [i.e. with the Duke of Gloucester]'(6 Apr. 1776). He also had more than one audience with the Pope. He was probably the 'Boursevill' in Florence at the end of June 1776.2



Tatem spent some twenty-five years in Sicily, the last seven as British consul. At the end of his life he recalled living at Messina with his brother during the plague in 1746.1 He was nominated consul on 29 October 17612 and left Sicily in 1767,3 but the last letter addressed to him as British consul was dated 29 May 1764.4 He came from Naples to Florence on 7 December 1767 and may have still been there on the 19th.5
Tatham was the second of Henry Holland's assistants to be sent to Rome (the first being Christopher Ebdon in 1774). He was given an allowance of £60 per annum and allowed to spend considerably more on fragments or casts of antiquity.1 His eventful voyage by sea to Italy is described in the entry for his travelling companion, J.M. Gandy. Upon arrival at Rome Tatham took lodgings in the Via Babuino in the house of a retired sculptor, Giocchino Falcioni (once occupied by Fuseli and Alexander Nasmyth).2 He began executing Holland's business immediately, by making contact with Thomas Jenkins and he found that prices varied from about £10 for a small antique fragment to £200 for an antique statue. Throughout the autumn of 1794 and spring of 1795 he collected what fragments he could for Holland, although French academicians dismissed from Rome (as hostilities threatened) had carried away an 'immense quantity'. Tatham was also having casts made, and shipping his acquisitions back to England.  His circle of acquaintance included the brother of the Italian expatriate architect Giuseppe Bonomi and the Abbate Carlo Bonomi, whilst Henry Holland's brother John introduced him to Prince Augustus. He met Cornelia Knight and heard Mrs Billington sing in the Palazzo Chigi. Among artists Tatham knew Alexander Day, Richard Westmacott and Angelica Kauffman (whose silhouette he drew in March 17963). He claimed he was 'particularly acquainted' with Canova, but his closest friend was the young architect Mario Asprucci (who was to design Ickworth for Lord Bristol), with whom he exchanged portraits by Vicenzo Camuccini. Pompeo Batoni's daughters were his laundrymaids. Tatham passed the summer of 1795 studying in the Vatican museums and making once-weekly excursions in the vicinity of Rome. With the assistance of Canova, he was able to obtain some antique fragments from Piranesi's collection, and he entered into negotiation for frieze and cornice fragments with Prince Borghese.4 In October 1795 Tatham told his patron that although there was little else worth buying in Rome, he had been assured of the quality of the collection he had built up, and several eminent individuals had suggested that publication of it would be worthwhile (a task he was later to undertake). Meanwhile his architectural education was not neglected. At a dinner in late 1794 with the 4th Earl of Bristol (and his young Irish architect Francis Sandys), Tatham received his first independent commission, for designs for Lord Bristol's house at Ickworth. These drawings cost him fourteen days of effort and several months of frustration. By February 1795 Lord Bristol had lost interest in Tatham, who described his patron as capricious and drunk, but by June the plans were once again under serious consideration. By that time, although Tatham had made several other designs (an elevation of a round house for John Holland's friend, George Hankin, and a temple dedicated to Kauffman), his ambition remained modest and he wished for nothing more than a reliable surveyorship.  Tatham was, however, interested in acquiring academic credentials and he tried for honorary memberships of Italian academies. On 29 March 1795 he was elected Accademico d'Onore of the Accademia Clementina, to whom he sent a drawing of a sculpture gallery as a sign of gratitude.6 This election was to prove advantageous, for in March 1796 Holland wrote to Tatham explaining how membership of one of four Italian academies (Rome, Florence, Parma or Bologna) was a qualification for admission to the British 'Architects' Club', of which Holland had been a founder-member in 1791.7 Tatham was finally received as an honorary academician at the Accademia di S. Luca in Rome in May 1797, after Bonomi's assurance that he was already a member of the London 'Society of Architects' (presumably the Architects' Club).8 Meanwhile Tatham continued with his professional studies: in the autumn of 1795 he had examined a number of roof trusses over major religious and secular spaces in Rome,9 a campaign undertaken jointly with the Spanish architect Isidoro Velasquez with whom he also reported measuring antiquities, and in April 1796 he had discussed the use of cementitious materials found at Naples. Tatham had arrived at Naples on 9 November 1795. At Velletri he had gained entry to Cardinal Borgia's museum of Egyptian antiquities, and at Naples Sir William Hamilton arranged for him to visit the local sites. Earlier in the year Tatham had said that an architect need only spend a short time in Naples, but it clearly appealed to him. He had good lodgings with a view of Vesuvius, and he admired the 'mahogany' complexion of the Neapolitans. He visited Pompeii and Herculaneum and was immensely impressed with Paestum. He stayed ten days in the apartment of Philipp Hackert at Caserta, and witnessed a performance of Emma Hamilton's 'attitudes'. It was at Naples that he first came into contact with the interior decorative work of J.H.W. Tischbein. Returning to Rome, Tatham was struck by the emptiness of the city. His only serious competitor as a collector was the 4th Earl of Bristol, and his major worry was the difficulty of shipping cases back to England - one having already been confiscated at sea by the French. By April 1796 he estimated his collection at 250 pieces, but by May, with the French army occupying Piacenza, it was no longer even possible to insure merchandise. Jenkins had offered to look after Tatham's collection for him, but Canova arranged for eight packed cases to be placed under the protection of the Venetian ambassador at Rome and looked after by the Venetian sculptor Antonio d'Este. The French had already started confiscating English property at Leghorn and the Commissioners had arrived in Rome to remove, so Tatham reported, 100 statues and 500 codices from the Vatican. In Tatham's view, the city was enduring a sacking, and had become a Babylon. It was the political situation and financial insecurity which deterred him from purchasing two paintings by Claude shortly before his departure from Rome, offered to him in desperation for 5,000 scudi by Prince Altieri, whose son had personally conducted him through the family palace.10  Tatham left Rome on 9 July 1796. The war made his long-intended visit to Florence impossible, causing a regret which 'exceeds all bounds', and he travelled directly to Venice in three days and nights, narrowly avoiding the French at Ravenna. Within two days of his arrival at Venice, Tatham made a four-day excursion to Vicenza, where he was especially impressed by Palladio's Basilica, Teatro Olimpico and Villa Rotunda, the 'chef d'oeuvre' of modern architecture, surpassing even the expectations which Chiswick Villa had aroused in him. 'Tartan Inglese Architeto' returned to Venice on 25 July.11 In Venice he was presented to the Doge by one of his architects, but his stay must have been brief, for by about 1 August he had reached Trieste, whence he continued to Vienna, arriving about 7 August.
He accompanied the British squadron to the Mediterranean in 1708-9, and he considered his account of the journey (Memoirs of the Fleets in the Mediterranean ... to which is annexed a Cursory View of Naples [1710]) to be the only modern description of southern Italy in the English language (DNB). Taubman was recommended to succeed Basil Kennett as chaplain to the British Factory at Leghorn in September 1710,1 but a year elapsed before he was allowed to take up this controversial post on a five-year term.2
Tavistock's letters to his cousin (the 2nd Earl of Upper Ossory) provide a full acount of his six-month visit to Italy in 1761-2.1 Well-disposed from the outset, he wrote from Genoa 'I have already received infinite entertainment from Italy and hope to receive a great, great deal more' (22 Dec. 1761).2 He travelled rapidly down to Naples, passing through Florence, where he was noticed by Horace Mann in January,3 and where he may well have commissioned the two scagliola tabletops by Lamberto Gori at Woburn which are dated 1763. He spent just two days in Rome, where Lord Strathmore had given him an introduction to the Abbé Grant,4 before going on to Naples. In mid-February 1762 Tavistock returned to Rome, this time spending nearly two months there.5 'I have only bought some prints and a little Basso releivo' he wrote, 'but at present I am engaged in a pretty deep affair - the buying some of the best things in the Barberini Palace'; Gavin Hamilton was his 'operator' and they had 'together pitched upon some things'-one being 'the famous death of Germanicus by Poussin' (6 Mar. 1762)-which, of course, they failed to get. But Tavistock did acquire, in 1764 after his return to England, the Barberini Guercino, Samson taking the Honey to his Father (1764; now Chrysler Mus., Norfolk, Virginia).  His relationship with Hamilton was apparently close: Tavistock commissioned from him Achilles dragging the Body of Hector which was painted 1762-56 (it was sold by the family in 1767 since the subject so nearly described the manner of Tavistock's tragic early death through a riding accident; it is now untraced), and Hamilton helped him acquire a Carracci Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane.7 But their association found fullest expression in the acquisition of ancient marbles, although only two, the much restored Athene and Ceres can be traced back to 1762 (they were displayed at Bedford House and are now at Woburn Abbey). Thomas Jenkins had warned Hamilton that 'Lord Tavistock would not give him a guinea for the finest [headless] torso ever discovered'.8 Tavistock also admired the Apollo Belvedere ('to have seen it, and not turn half Pagan, is, I think, impossible') and commissioned a copy of it for £250.9  Tavistock also acquired in Rome a set of five bronzes by Giacomo Zoffoli, reproductions of classical figures (Woburn),10 and he sat to Batoni in 1762, the artist exceptionally making a miniature copy (both at Woburn; Clark/ Bowron 249-50). He commissioned works from James Forrester who in 1764 had 'some beautiful Views' in his studio destined for Tavistock,11 and the Abbé Chiozzi made drawings for him after frescoes by Guido Reni and Domenichino.12 With the 3rd Duke of Grafton, he took an interest in John Needham's theories on Egyptian hieroglyphs, and he frequented Sir William Stanhope's house with the Graftons (according to James Adam).13 In April 1762 he was in Bologna14-a town that deserved 'three weeks or a month' to visit-and heading for England via Venice.15 The Venetian constitution, he later explained, inspired him with a 'useful' and 'proper dread of aristocracy', and he found the town itself 'the most calculated for luxurious idleness of any place I know' (12 Sep. 1763). Tavistock much impressed the Duke of Savoy in the course of his brief visit to Turin in May 1762,16 and he arrived in England at the end of the month.
Induced by economical views, and yet more by the desire for promoting the education of his children', the Rev. Taylor removed his family to the Continent in 1780 for eight years, which were mostly spent at Karlsruhe.1 In 1789 he left England for the same reasons, but this time for Italy and as a widower with four of his sons and three daughters, Edward (1774-1843), Herbert (1779-1839), Brook (b. 1776), William (d. 1797), Mary-Elizabeth (d. 1840), Charlotte (d. 1836) and Margaret (d. 1809). The family was attended by an elderly family servant (Richard Simmons) and a Mr Fraentyl who taught them German and music, but they were 'not encumbered' with a governess. In November and December 1789 Arthur Young met them at Bologna where they were renting the first floor of the Palazzo Sampieri; he spoke husbandry with the father and housekeeping with the admirably educated two daughters.2 Elizabeth Gibbes was visited by a Mr Taylor in Bologna: 'a worthy man, but he looks oppressed', and in May 1790 she drank tea with 'the Taylors' in Florence.3 The Taylor family took a house in the suburbs of Florence for 'about four months' that summer. They moved to Rome where they occupied part of a house 'in an airy part of the Strada del Popolo', and gave musical evenings frequented by French émigrés, artists (Flaxman, Canova and Vigée Lebrun), as well as British travellers: Lord Camelford (previously Thomas Pitt) was later able to assist Taylor's second son Herbert. The Taylors were also visited by Bridges (1778-1814), the fifth son and midshipman on the Aquilon, and together the sons played the 'Nobile Giuoco di Crichetto' in the grounds of the Villa Borghese. Summer 1791 was spent at Naples (at the Crocelli Hotel) and mostly in Vietri (where there was 'no society'). The family then spent another winter in Rome. On 10 May 1792 Taylor and his seven children arrived in Venice4 on their voyage home.


For more than thirty years the 'Chevalier' Taylor travelled through Europe,1 from Sweden to Portugal, and from Ireland to Moscow, giving lectures and performing eye operations: 'Why Taylor the quack calls himself Chevalier, / 'Tis not easy a reason to render; / Unless blinding eyes, that he thinks to make clear, / Demonstrates he's but a pretender.'2  A portrait of Taylor by Chevalier Ryche painted in Rome, probably in the late 1730s (now lost), is the only evidence of a visit to Italy before 1754.3  By his own account he was in Venice in the autumn of 1754 before travelling to Rome, where Cardinal Albani had been persuaded 'to trust him for one eye'.4 Laden with 'dignities' Taylor proceeded to Naples, where he had arrived by 25 February,5 to tour 'every town of consideration in that Kingdom'. He was attacked and robbed on the road back to Rome by his Domestique,6 losing 'pictures of crown'd heads, incircled with brilliants, diamond rings, many goldboxes richly adorned, numberless instruments used in my profession of solid gold ... chiefly presents from sovreigns, exceeding in value thirty thousand Roman crowns'. He pressed on to Parma (December 1755) where he dedicated his treatise on the correction of squints to Philip, Duke of Parma,7 and then to 'every state and town of the least consideration in all Italy, without exception', heading out again through Venice in December 1756.5  Thirteen years later John Taylor was back in Italy, advertising his skills in the Gazzetta Toscana.8 His progress was noted in the correspondence of the Verri brothers: Pietro reported from Milan on 17 March 1770 that his operations had not all been successful and since he was now quite old his hand was not steady. Taylor told him he wanted to spend eight months a year in Rome and intended to marry there. Alessandro Verri wrote from Rome on 24 March that all the English thought Taylor a charlatan. On 18 April Pietro described how an operation performed on the Duke of Modena had had no effect.9 After touring the northern Italian cities Taylor came to Rome, where he died on 16 November, in 'extreme poverty'; 'stripped of all the orders he had assumed unlicensed',10 he was buried by the foot of the Pyramid of Cestius.11 An etching of Mi so Chiamare il Cavre di Taylor was made by Patch in 1770.
He acquired one of Richard Wilson's Italian landscapes in Rome in 1773,1 and he appears in Zoffany's Tribuna (Windsor), indicating he was also in Florence. He was probably the Mr Taylor who passed through Capua on 7 January 17732 and Piranesi dedicated a plate to him in his Vasi Candelabri, Cippi [1778].
Taylor's 'new' method of making miniature copies after the old masters was much admired in Italy by Lord Gardenstone: 'by the manner of fixing it to the glass ... it has a depth and harmony which resembles the colouring of old capital paintings, softened and ameliorated by time'. By March 1788 Gardenstone had bought Taylor's miniature after Correggio's Marriage of St Catherine, and had commissioned ten further copies from him after old masters (and one after Taylor's own miniature of a Dr Armstrong).1 Taylor was listed in Rome in 1790 as a miniaturist living by the Quartiere dei Avignonesi (Rome List 1790). Mrs Flaxman called on 'Taylors' in Rome in February and April 1791;2 Guy Head diverted commissions to himself by setting Mrs Hare-Naylor 'against poor Taylor',3 presumably the same.  He was conceivably the 'Milord Giovanni Taylor con moglie' who arrived in Venice on 19 September 1789.4

On completing his apprenticeship under Henry Cheere, Taylor was given 'just enough money to travel on a plan of frugal study to Rome' (DBA). His father died while he was in Italy (autumn 1742),1 and resolving to return without the necessary passports, Taylor alleged he travelled home disguised as a Franciscan friar (DBS).





Taylor was mentioned at Rome by William Kent in a letter of 24 November 1714.1 In May 1715 he was one of a party of Englishmen at Venice 'to see the Fair of the Ascention & soone proceed homewards'.2
A Mr Teckel, whose wife died here last week', was entertained by William Hamilton at Naples on 10 September 1779 with Lord Herbert (Pembroke Papers, 1:246).

Tempest was in Florence in November 1789, dining with John, Lord Hervey, and (with 'Mr Tyrrhit') at Lord Elcho's.1 In February 1790 he was in Rome, dining with 'Tyrwhitte' and the Gibbes.2 Tempest and a Mr Byrne arrived together at Venice on 24 April 1790.3

Temple was in Provence c.1724,1 and was travelling in Italy late in 1725 with his governor 'Lignieres' [Gabriel Liniere].2 Stosch noticed them about to leave Rome for Naples in December 1725, and again when they returned to Rome from Naples in March 1727, Temple then looking 'très chancellante et foible'.3 Willem Bentinck then thought that Temple didn't 'take as much care of his health as he ought in his condition'4 but he was planning to return 'shortly' to England.3
Templeton, an Irishman, studied medicine at Padua University, signing himself in December 1718 as 'Hibernus medicinae et Philosopiae studens Patavii'.1 In July 1719 'Mr Templeton English Gent Student in Physik at Padua' complained to the British resident in Venice of being disturbed by 'ye Sindiq of ye German Nation there, in taking his Doctors Degree', and Cunningham effectively protested to the University at such encroachments of 'ye ancient priviledges of ye British Nation'.2 Templeton proceeded to his doctorate in July.3
An amateur sculptor of some distinction, Lady Templetown was first in Italy as Mrs Upton with her husband in 1773-5, see Clotworthy Upton. She returned to Italy late in 1792 as Lady Templetown, a widow with three daughters-Elizabeth Albana (who was born in Albano in August 1775), Caroline and Sophia-and 'As Girls go', she told Sir Roger Newdigate, 'they are not amiss'.1 Lady Templetown was in Rome in December 1792 'enchanted' by Flaxman's works and on 19 January 1793 Mrs Flaxman went to see Lady Templetown's drawings.2 By March 1793 she was in Naples,3 where she appears to have spent the next two years. By July 1794, together with other English ladies in Naples and Rome, she was 'busily employed in making shirts, &c. for the British troops at Corsica'.4 That summer in Naples she met Francis Newdigate, and she was writing to Sir Roger Newdigate in September; he supplied her with a 'recipe' for her failing eyesight, while she expressed a wish to return home, but the French wars made such a journey hazardous: 'I had rather be destroyed by the burning Monster that is near us [there had been an extraordinary eruption of Vesuvius in June 1794]', she wrote, 'than by those new species of Barbarians'.1 In a second letter of January 1795 she complained of the uniformity of her days,5 but at the same time she was described as spending a 'large jointure' in masquerades and balls,6 doubtless for her daughters' sake (a drawing of the three Upton daughters made by Lady Henry Fitzgerald in the summer of 1794 had been much admired).7 In December 1794 Lord Longford was pleased to discover in Naples the pretty Miss Uptons and the 'pleasant society' at their mother's house and in January 1795 he described Lady Templetown as 'by nature a meddler but it is a good kind of one who wishes really to forward any business she undertakes (& she wd undertake more than any other ten people)'.8  The family left Naples soon after, for by early May they were in Venice,9 heading for Vienna, where they were reunited with her eldest son, Lord Templetown, in June.10


In Naples and Florence 'Tyrryl' / 'Tyrry' / 'Terrey' wished to master Italian and understand 'the disposition, general manners and peculiar customs' of the Italians (Artaud letter bk.MSS, 15 Dec. 1797).

A Catholic, travelling with Jerningham [possibly Sir George Jerningham], he came to Italy through Lyons and passed through Florence in November 1729.1 By April 1730 they were in Rome. They met James Herbert and his tutor Edward Holdsworth at Tivoli and visited the Pretender's court at Albano before leaving for Naples in October.2 Teynham was among the chief British visitors to Venice for Ascension in the spring of 1731 and went on to Bologna for the opera (which lasted all of June).3

Lord Thanet was noticed in Rome in December 17881 and in Naples early in January 1789,2 on both occasions in company which included George, Marquess of Lorne.

Theed went to Italy with his fellow artist and close friend John Frearson. They were in Florence in April 1790, staying at Vannini's, when Theed was summoned back to England (16 Apr. 1790),1 but on 27 April he was applying to copy Rubens's Hercules in the Uffizi.2 He returned alone to England, but his visit was short; by January 1791 he was back in Genoa (17 Jan. 1791) and by February he had rejoined Frearson in Rome.  Mrs Flaxman saw Frearson and Theed several times in February and March 1791, and in June she noted they had walked from Frascati to Rome.3 In 1792 Theed was unwell but was attended by Frearson and the painter Henry Howard (5 Jan. 1793). Theed later described Howard and Frearson as the only friends he had in Rome (9 Jul. 1794). In the spring of 1792 Theed shared an address near the Casa Guarnieri with the American painter James Smith 'of Parma'.4 In 1793 he was listed as a history painter living on the Corso at the corner of the Strada Laurina, and in April 1794 he signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus from English artists in Rome (Rome Lists 1793, 1794). Theed was not particularly happy, or successful, in Rome. In July 1792 he told his father: 'you will imagine I have taken up my residence here for life - but be assured that this is not the case for every day increases my detestation of the people and the place; and were it not for the beauties in art which exist here I believe I should settle my concerns in ten minutes and be off' (18 Jul. 1792). In the end it was a lack of commissions, rather than the advancing French, which led to his retreat: in October 1794 he wrote that his own situation 'gets daily more and more uncomfortable ... yet I have not the courage to leave Rome' (11 Oct. 1794), but in February 1795 he was saying there had been 'no commissions given this year except by Lord Bristol and those only to such as could incircle him' (18 Feb. 1795). He later said that living in Rome had become expensive, the wars had reduced the number of English travellers, and 'encouragement' had consequently been rare.5 Little is known of Theed's work in Italy, but two marble busts by him of James Scott and his son, James Winter Scott, executed 'not long before Theed returned to England' are recorded.6  In July 1795, still with Frearson, Theed visited Naples (7 Jul. 1795), where he was said to have married a Frenchwoman, Mlle Rougeot (DNB), though she is not mentioned in his letters. A year later, on 22 July 1796, Theed and Frearson were in Venice7 on their way home.
This itinerary is taken from the summary in HMC 5th Rpt., 366 (Shirley MSS).

He arrived in Venice in April,1 and there obtained a letter of introduction to Horace Mann in Florence.2
Thomas described his tour in a series of freshly-observed letters addressed to the antiquary Dr Jeremiah Milles (Thomas letters MSS), with whom he may have shared a connection in Waterford, Ireland. In Genoa he was pleased with a second-hand chaise he had bought, which 'thundered over the mountains of Genova' without 'even a pin displac'd'; the Genoese carriages were best, he explained, 'since ye timber us'd in them has been seasoning many years in ye Gallies & ye Shafts are made of ye old Galley Oars' (21 Aug. 1750). He bought 'ye handsomest Suit of black velvet yt ye City of Genova could afford' and, to dine with Horace Mann in summer, he wore 'light colour'd rich Silk, figurd, & what they call a Lyons Drugget ... Wth this my Bagg wigg, Dresden Ruffles, & white silk for a Change' (ibid.). Naples appalled him; 'I was afraid even of my own Valet de Place there' he wrote; 'the truth is that they are a most diabbolical people' (2 Nov.), but Romish rituals were worse still: 'I was never more shock'd in my life' he wrote of the ceremony of the shutting of the Porta Sancta, Rome: 'I got close behind a confessional to avoid a random stroke from my neighbours who had more of this kind of devotion than Honesty. I had ye ding of chains rattleing in my ears, (for Fellows, I'm told are hird to flogg themselves here with them) & the noise of the Scourges rattling like Hail upon ye Tiles for three days after. This whipping work in ye dark lasted above a quarter of an hour; I thought it would never end' (6 Jan. 1751). But he was at least pleased that the Romans showed 'great Civilities' towards the English and a proper contempt for the Pretender (3 Mar. 1751). He had tried to acquire some 'Consular meddals' in Rome but 'as well as Mr Patch' he found that 'the Passion for Meddals of this kind has been so strong of late' that even the poorest examples were very expensive (2 Nov.). In Venice he was unsettled by the sight of courtesans luring tourists from churches (Venice, 31 Mar. 1751) and in his last letter from Italy he vividly described a dinner of offal and amphibians 'so full of Garlick yt I am almost poisond wth ye Stench' (7 Apr. 1751).


He was lent £400 in Rome by the 8th Duke of Hamilton (who was there in December 1775). By January 1776 he was living with his wife near Geneva (Argyll ed., Intimate Society Letters of the 18th cent., 2:424).Watercolours of the Roman Forum signed Thomas 1788 and Thomas, Roma 1788, were sold in 1953 (Robinson & Foster, 19 Mar.).


The putative author of The Travels of the late Charles Thompson, Esq., Containing his Observations of France, Italy ..., [1744]. The first edition was published in fifty instalments in 1730-2, and doubts were then raised about the author, whose identity has never been confirmed. The Travels appears to be based on a real tour, and provides a useful account of pre-Bourbon Parma before the dispersal of the Farnese collections (F. Razzetti, Aurea Parma, 63[1979]:212-4).

Henry Thompson arrived with Lord Carlisle's party in Venice in August 1768,1 and was presumably the Thompson described by Lord Carlisle as having unsuccessfully offered four hundred pounds per annum, on certain conditions, for the pretty daughter of the English keeper of the hotel where they were staying in Turin.2
Warehouse Keeper' of the Charitable Corporation, he fled from England when the Corporation failed in 1732, only to be imprisoned in June at the Castel Sant' Angelo 'by the Interest of Ratcliffe [Charles Radclyffe?] at the Instances of Mr Edwin',1 or at the instigation of the banker Angelo Belloni.2 In July Thomson declared himself a 'Catholic and a partisan of the Pretender's'.3

Thompson' was in Rome in December 1774 with the 3rd Baron Monson, Henry Peirse and 'many others'.1 Richard Thompson of Escrick was elected to the Dilettanti in 1776, the same year as Peirse and Lord Monson.

He was in Padua by August 1724,1 and Sir Edward Gascoigne met him there that winter.2 On 17 September 1725 Rawlinson noted that Thompson was 'vice syndic of the University of Padua this year'3 and he was presumably the Thomas Thompson at Padua with Daniel Wray and Chichester Willoughby in March 1726.4
He attended Lord Holland in October 1794, and Lady Webster the following April in Rome (Holland Jnl., 1:129, 131).

Thomson told Farington he was abroad 6 years, 'three years at Rome - 9 months at Vienna'.1 He was in Italy with his father (who had previously taken him to Paris) and he returned speaking 'French and Italian well & a little German'.2 On their journey to Rome he met in Parma the printer Bodoni, with whom he maintained a lively correspondence advising him on an English edition of James Thomson's Seasons.3 At Bologna he made copies of paintings ('Je suis occupé à présent dans la maison d'Armano à faire des mémoires en couleurs des tableaux qui me plaisent le plus'), and he befriended the engraver Rosaspina.4  Little is known of his three years in Rome. He sent a portrait for exhibition at the RA in 1794 and Artaud mentioned an excellent caricature he made of an expedition on asses to Hadrian's Villa in the autumn of 1796.5 Thomson was amongst those who ostracised George Wallis, the English painter whose radical sympathies led to him being considered a republican 'spy'.6 Apart from a visit to Naples with Artaud in March 1796,7 Thomson remained in Rome until the military situation became too uncomfortable to pursue his studies 'avec plaisir ou avec profit', at which point he and his father went to Naples.8 With Artaud, Richard Duppa, R.R. Reinagle and Edward Swinburne, he visited Paestum and Capri in May/June 1797.9 The 'Bilious fevers' which had plagued him throughout his stay were cured in Naples with arsenic.10 Father and son returned to England via Vienna and Germany.
The poet James Thomson was appointed travelling companion to Charles Richard Talbot, eldest son of Charles Talbot, the Solicitor-General, in 1730, and he received a generous yearly allowance of £220.1 He set out with high expectations, longing 'to see the fields whence Virgil gathered his immortal honey', but the one surviving letter he wrote from Italy (to Bubb Dodington on 28 November 1731, from Rome) suggests he became disillusioned. 'That Enthusiasm I had upon me with regard to travelling goes off, I find, very fast. One may imagine fine things in reading of antient authors, but to travel is to dissipate that vision'; rather than 'travelling so furiously, it were a wiser and more public-spirited thing, with part of those vast sums of money spent that way, to send people of genius for architecture, painting, and sculpture, to study these arts here and to import them into England'; as for his Muse, 'I belive she did not cross the channel with me'. Thomson's itinerary is not clear. They went to Venice where Spence saw them (he was there between 15 November 1731 and March 1732)2 and they were in Padua on 9 May 1732, where they met their old acquaintances Patrick Murdoch and John Forbes.3 In Florence that summer (from 11 July) Spence listed a 'Thomson', conceivably the poet.4


Having previously trained at the Scots College in Rome,1 Thomson succeeded the Abbé Peter Grant as Roman Agent to the Scottish Catholic Mission in 1782. 'My situation & reception here [in Rome] was fully as bad as I had imagined it would be', he wrote: 'Those who thought it their interest to oppose me laid their heads together & had recourse to the last resource, a Memorial to the Pope, to keep me out of the College, & when this did not succeed, they endeavoured to render my abode in it uneasy by excluding me from any employment in it.'2 Grant made a hasty departure in March 1783, leaving College affairs to Thomson 'in the greatest confusion'.3 Thomson died in Naples in 1792.4
Accused of 'an offence which happily public opinion in this country never forgives', Thomson resigned all his medical appointments in September 1790 and left for the Continent.1 He appears to have devoted his time to the study of minerology and geology in Italy. He spent the winter of 1791-2 in Tuscany. In Siena he met the naturalist Ambrogio Soldani who remained his correspondent,2 and in Florence he was experimenting with quartz crystals. But Thomson appears to have spent most of his time in Naples, where his two known addresses were 'chez M. Heigelin' at the Danish Consulate [n.d.] and 'nel palazzo Gen Acton' [1794], and where he found a kindred spirit in Sir William Hamilton.3 When Vesuvius erupted in June 1794 Thomson took a boat to observe the lava pour into the sea; in 1795 he made a collection of objects from the half-buried town of Torre del Greco, and he made other mineralogical expeditions to Castellamare, Ischia and Solfatara. He published some of his findings in Italian, as Guglielmo Thomson. In 1799 he followed the Neapolitan court to Sicily. Two years after Thomson's death (which occured in Sicily in 1806) his Tuscan servant Dominico Unti escorted the Doctor's collection from Palermo to Edinburgh; it included 10,000 geological specimens and 823 books, besides his portrait and a plaster bust by Cardelli.
Thomson alias ffolkes' was in a party with Lord Edward Drummond, Lord Clermont, Lord Southesk and others (SP 99/61, ff.332, 334).
Thornbury was in Rome with a Dutch companion, N. Ten Hove, and the Swiss artist Louis Ducros in April 1778. They were joined by two other Dutchmen, H. van Nieuwerkerke and W.C. Dierkens, and together set out to make a tour of Sicily and Malta. The French journal of their travels has been published,1 and it includes a description of Thornbury's great excitement at seeing the crater of Mount Etna.


He is recorded at Padua1 and Florence,2 travelling in the retinue of the 3rd Earl of Radnor.

Said to have left England because of his debts, Thorold went on to make a fortune in Genoa, and was made a Baronet in 1741.1 He later became a merchant in Naples and by 1749 had built himself a villa on Capri2 and was 'much respected by the whole island'.3 James Martin visited him there in January 17644 (the year Thorold died at Capri5) and later Swinburne described the villa as a 'charming retreat, which [Thorold] had formed with every convenience the climate required in one of the most agreable situations upon the island'.6 Pancrazi dedicated a plate to 'Natale Thorold' in his Antichita Siciliane [Naples 1751-2].
Thorold was seen in Rome by the Duke of Shrewsbury on 29 October 17021 and he was presumably the Samuel Thorold at Padua on 7 April 1703.2
Thorpe came to Rome in 1756 when he was thirty, and remained there until his death thirty-six years later. While his career as a Jesuit priest followed an orthodox progression, his protracted correspondence with the Catholic 8th Baron Arundell of Wardour, from 1767 until his death, remains of particular interest (Thorpe letters MSS and Thorpe letters MSS*).1 It was centred on the acquisition of works of art in Rome, a business Thorpe initially regarded with diffidence, but in which he eventually became adept. He would often write twice a week, scrupulous and respectful letters, not devoid of gossip and instruction. Lord Arundell, fourteen years his junior, had been his pupil at the Jesuit College at St Omer in 1753-8 and been in Rome on his grand tour in 1760, when he had celebrated his twentieth birthday in the grounds of the English College at Rome, where Thorpe was then studying. Thorpe became an English Penitentiary at St Peter's and was agent for the English Province of the Jesuits until 1773, when the Order was suppressed; he was then a secular priest and an active agent for the Liège Academy. When he left the English College in 1773 he shared lodgings with the painter James Forrester on the Corso, where he was first listed at Easter 1774;2 after Forrester's death he moved to rooms by S.Maria Maggiore which he shared with Father Ignatius Rhomberg (3 Feb., 6 Apr. 1776; 30 Jan. 1782), and in 1786 (when Rhomberg moved to the Gesu) Thorpe moved to S.Carlo, an ecclesiastical establishment on the Corso, where only the Church wall 'divides me from the Altar' (22 Aug. 1787). Thorpe was much concerned at the 'great & deplorable degeneracy in Catholick families' in England (29 Nov. 1788). He had been devoted to Pope Clement XIII, watching at his death bed and sending Arundell a lock of his hair (Feb.*, 17 Mar.*1769). He was, of course, less happy with the 'Infamous pontificate of Ganganelli' [Clement XIV] (25 Feb. 1775) during which the Jesuit Order was suppressed, but he admired the piety and simplicity of his successor, Pius VI (27 Feb. 1782).  Thorpe described his life as being one of 'restraint and confinement' (24 Mar. 1770*), and when Arundell first suggested he might act as his agent for the embellishment of Wardour Castle, he advised that he should better employ James Byres, the well-established antiquary (17 Jul. 1767*): 'my present Studies and occupation are very widely different from those of our modern Virtuosi in painting, Sculpture and architecture. Besides these painters &c are a peculiar set of persons; a more than ordinary dexterity is required in treating with them' (4 Jul. 1769*). By 1771 however he was explaining with a certain relish how acquisitions were made. 'For it is catch as catch can. The grand business is to have the first intelligence of where a good thing may be had, & there take it at first hand: for which purpose both an eye in the head and ready money in the pocket are necessary' (2 Feb. 1771). Until his death in 1774, Thorpe was greatly helped by the Irish (Catholic) painter Forrester; a bargain was 'often left to be concluded by him, that I may not too much appear ... [or] my name might figure in Some pamphlet against the Jesuits, or Something worse happen to my person; Forrester had also to 'be upon his guard, & keep everything as Secret as possible, not to give offence to our British dealers in Virtu'. Forrester would keep the pictures, since it was 'impossible that I should have any thing at the house where I live [attached to the English College] ... we confer together about the cleaning, framing & whatever else is to be done before they be sent away' (20 Jul. 1771). Thorpe allowed, however, that 'it is always dangerous to be quacking with good pictures' (4 Feb. 1775). He also occasionally employed a Father Canonici to look for paintings (4 Aug. 1770*); in 1771 he sent him 200 Roman crowns for purchases (5 Jan. 1771), and in August that year he was telling Arundell of a Correggio Canonici had for 50 zecchini (3 Aug. 1771). Prints and drawings were regularly sent to Wardour in tin tubes, while paintings and larger objects were crated and sent by sea from Leghorn, twice or four times a year. Arundell had regard for Thorpe's capability, even though Thorpe told him 'You too favourably suppose me to have once had a taste' for 'Paintings & the like valuable Rarities of Italy' (6 Jun. 1770*). Thorpe had been an amateur artist: he mentioned A sleeping Child in pastels as 'the last of my own dawbing above ten years ago' (18 Oct. 1771) and he expressed a taste for things that are 'fine, rich & a good bargain' (2 Mar. 1771). Among the earliest of Thorpe's purchases were a pietra dura cabinet, prints, paintings and 'Religious Things' (ibid.); five months later he is seeking 'scenes from Sacred History, having always a strict regard to decency' (30 Nov. 1770*). Arundell evidently had an over-developed sense of propriety: Thorpe tells him that 'it was in vain to ask an able hand to throw a covering over any part of the Sacd. Infant or St John' in a copy from Raphael (6 Jun. 1770*), but he was to ask Maron to cover the Child in two copies by Sassoferrato from Guido Reni (30 Jun. 1770*). By March 1771 he is telling Arundell of his design for Wardour Castle involving 'some capital pieces' and 'a great variety of smaller things of different authors, that within your own house Your Lordship & Lady Arundell may enjoy a pleasing amusement in observing the different manners of painting in the greatest Masters, & at the Same time have Something that may draw the attention & admiration of Noblemen who have larger Collections' (2 Mar. 1771). The 'capital pieces' were to include works by both Mengs and Batoni, who proved not only expensive but difficult. Thorpe argued that they could get 'as good or better pictures for less money' (20 Apr. 1771), but Arundell was insistent. Thorpe tried to approach Mengs 'by means of persons to whom he professes obligations' (2 Mar. 1771), but he failed to get a commissioned work. Instead he obtained copies of Mengs's portraits of Clement XIII and Cardinal Rezzonico (sent in February 1771), and an original portrait of Father Gahagan (28 May 1774), described as a Portrait Head by Mengs Drapery by Maron when dispatched in March 1774 (see Father Gahagan). Batoni had first been asked to copy two ancestral portraits for Lord Arundell in 1771, but no progress was made (23 Feb., 23 Mar., 25 Dec. 1771), and the commission seems to have been undertaken by William Miller. Batoni was not only dilatory, but his 'unfixed price, which he raises at pleasure' (9 Mar. 1774) further complicated dealings. At first Thorpe by-passed the artist and bought from Cardinal Pirelli's sale Batoni's Presentation in the Temple, which was sent to Wardour in August 1771 (Clark/Bowron 4; priv. coll.). Hagar and the Angel (Clark /Bowron 394; Galleria Nazionale, Rome) was begun in 1774; Batoni had chosen the subject, but it needed payments of '30 or 40 crowns each week' in the summer of 1776 before it was sent to England in November that year. Batoni then proposed a Sacrifice of Abraham as a companion piece, but the negotiations fell through. In July 1775 Thorpe sent copies by Robillard of Batoni's portraits of Cardinal J.B. and Prince Abbondio Rezzonico, the nephews of Clement XIII. Thorpe always stressed that Arundell should not mention his purchases 'untill they be fairly shipped off' (23 Mar. 1771), nor reveal the 'trifling sums' he is paying for some pictures, 'because such intelligence would much displease Some persons here, with whom I wish to live in good harmony, & not be suspected of prejudicing their business'. Thorpe even suggested arranging a secret correspondence under name of Henry Harrison (20 Jul. 1771). By the middle of 1771 Arundell had 'So solidly established my credit, that any one will take my Bill', and Thorpe was even finding his profession an advantage as he was sometimes privately offered first refusal or a low price on purchases from ecclesiastical collections (15 May 1771). In two years Thorpe spent £1,470 (29 Jun. 1771); he sent Arundell 54 pictures in 1771, 47 in 1772 and 19 in 1773 (the year of the Jesuit repression) and 76 in 1774 (Thorpe list MSS). In 1774 Thorpe first offered Labruzzi copies of the four Doria Pamphilj Claudes, obtained in 'in the most secret manner, & by the means of continual fees to the Keepers' (9 Jul., 10 Aug. 1774); they were sent to Wardour in June and October 1775.  Thorpe had previously told Arundell that 'In general the purchasing of good old pictures is in many respects preferable to the making of new copies, for middling Copies often demand more money than what some other good original may with industry be had for; besides we are always sure that the old pictures will keep their colour, having been tried by time; but no one can answer for the colouring of modern copies' (20 Feb. 1771). But according to the Thorpe list MSS many contemporary copies were acquired, after Titian, Batoni, Guido Reni, Raphael, van Dyck and Correggio, the copyists named as Robillard, Miller and Labruzzi. The picture collection reflected orthodox taste; portraits (but with a bias toward Jesuit and Arundell history), large landscapes and many 17th-century religious pieces by names such as Dolci, Maratti, Pietro da Cortona and Barocci. Thorpe bought in addition a number of works from British artists in Rome: landscapes by Dean and Forrester and portraits copied by Miller and Wickstead. In 1775 Arundell seems to have called a halt to his collecting, and turned his attention to a new Chapel at Wardour. 'I wish you to have the most elegant Chapel in England', wrote Thorpe (28 Jan. 1775). Two weeks later he writes 'My chief wish is to see Your Lordship have a Chapel that men of understanding in these matters may commend & admire: but ornaments in the Friar stile or like those in Village Churches, to dazzle the eyes of some devout ignorant starers can never be what Wardour deserves' (11 Feb. 1775). Thorpe had previously expressed his preference for 'An elegant plainness' (26 Oct. 1771), and in 1771 he had considered Byres's designs for an altar 'too rich for such a country as ours' (30 Mar. 1771). The Wardour altar was eventually designed by Quarenghi, 'one of the most clumsy awkward looking fellows that Your Lordship ever saw, passionately fond of musick & ready to abandon everything for it; he works when his cloaths are in pawn, & he has not a groat to pay for his dinner ... Think, my Lord, what a man I have to deal with' (22 Oct. 1774*). In July 1776 the export licence was granted to Thorpe, 'Sacerdote Inglese', for 'un Altare di Marmo di Antonio Vinelli Romano cogli ornamenti di metalli.3 The altarpiece, a Deposition by Giuseppe Cades, was nearing completion in October 1780 and was 'to be exposed in the Pantheon for the publick' (21 Oct. 1780*); it appears it was returned to Rome in 1787 for alterations ('the Drapery brought out more on the thighs, the two Crosses added in the background'; 24 Feb. 1787).  The completion of the altar marked the high point of Thorpe's relations with Arundell. In 1776 Arundell gave him an annuity (15 Jun. 1776) which continued to 1781 (9 Apr. 1781). Twenty-seven paintings were sent to Arundell in 1776, and then a series of petty disagreements sets in: over the subject of the altarpiece (19 Oct. 1776), the incorrect application of Quarenghi's ceiling designs in the chapel (9 Nov. 1776), and the reception of a chimneypiece Thorpe had had made in Rome (10 Jan. 1788). Thorpe complained of not hearing from Arundell (7 Aug. 1776, 12 Aug. 1780*), but their relationship survived. More paintings were dispatched in 1783 and 1788 (12 Jul. 1783, 20 Aug. 1788), and in 1789 Thorpe presented Arundell with a marble relief of a Virgin and Child by P.-E. Monnot which had been 'the altarpiece of our General's private chapel ... I have always kept it carefully waiting an occasion of placing it with satisfaction' (6 Jun. 1789). In 1791 Thorpe presented Arundell with 'some things that I wished to place in my own lifetime', including a copy of a Raphael Holy Family, 'an ancient painting' St Augustin & St Hubert, the Virgin & Infant by Solario, 'a noble child' by Veronese and the sketch of St Xavier by Baciccio (4 Jun. 1791). Thorpe's letters reveal, discreetly, that he also acted for other collectors. He was helping the 9th Earl of Exeter in 1771 (27 Nov. 1771); a 'friend' of his was interested in buying pictures by Volaire, should Arundell decline them (2 Dec. 1774*), and Thorpe helped the two Catholic collectors, Henry Blundell of Ince and Thomas[?] Weld of Lulworth. Thorpe disapproved of the 'eagerness' with which 'our Eng: Gentry of a different persuasion is purchasing every thing that Catholicks call helps to devotion, as Crucifixes, little Statues & pictures of the B.d Virgin & the Saints, & the like pious ornaments of private oratories' (15 Dec. 1770*). As Thorpe's business prospered he had to regard Byres and Jenkins, the principal British dealers in Rome, with respect. The Catholic Byres, 'as good a Christian as he is an ingenious Virtuoso' (17 Jul. 1767*), had helped Thorpe in 1769 and 1770 over the first design of an altar for Wardour (10 Oct. 1769*, 6 Jun. 1770*). Jenkins was rather different; Thorpe knew him too well 'to think of ever getting anything that deserves to go to your Lordship at a reasonable price' (1 Jan. 1774). Thorpe observed that 'no regard is here for Catholicks, the protestants are the first in favour, & to whom nothing is to be refused. This system is a mystery, & no one says by what merit Mr Jenkins & others have insinuated themselves into such distinction' (6 Feb. 1774).  Thorpe's specific comments on British artists in Rome will be found in their entries, but 'in general', he wrote, they 'are very Saucy, & must be exorbitant in their prices, while they pretend to live as high as the noblemen who employ them, & indulge as many vices as any body; yet very few of them have merit to support any thing like these pretensions' (25 Jun. 1774); they 'are sometimes too partial to their countrymen & friends, & by blowing themselves up, retard their own progress. Pleasures are also a great impediment to the advancement; they are here found at a cheaper rate than at home, but in the conclusion they cost very dear' (10 Oct. 1789). His acquaintance with foreign artists was widespread. He admired Piranesi 'who has done more for the honour of the Antiquities of Rome, & for the fine Arts in general, than any other Artist whatever' (10 Nov. 1778 A), and he claimed Canova as 'an intimate acquaintance' (22 Dec. 1787).  Thorpe died in Rome on 12 April 1792, having suffered from an 'unmannerly infirmity' for some two years (27 Nov. 1790). He left his collection to the Academy at Liège (then the principal college for English Jesuits); it included bas-reliefs, paintings, prints and drawings, crucifixes and relics, besides 'a noble and awfull alter' which had cost Thorpe 2,000 crowns. His executor was Father James Connell, chaplain and secretary to Cardinal Rinnucini in Rome. Many of Thorpe's possessions remain at Stonyhurst (whither Liège migrated in 1794), but his principal legacy now appears to be his correspondence, an eventuality he had foreseen when he told Arundell that 'it is proper that such intelligence Should be deposited along with the Inventory among the Archives of your family for the use or amusements of posterity' (26 Oct. 1771).

The brothers John and George Throckmorton were in Italy in 1774-5, and it appears that one of them had previously visited Florence and Rome in 1772. A Throckmorton was in Florence in the summer of 1772,1 and in September 'Mr Throgmorton' carried commissions to England for Horace Mann.2 A Batoni portrait of 1772 (Coughton; Clark/Bowron 351) shows either John Courtenay or his brother George (1754-1826, later 6th Bt.).  The brothers were certainly together in Rome by March 1774, when they were being shepherded by their uncle James Paston and the Benedictine George Augustine Walker. Father Thorpe then wrote that 'The two young Mr Trockmortons reside with the Monk Walker in a wretched situation in Trastevere. They frequent low English company, because there is the favourite card table of their tutor [Walker], unless when he chooses to exhibit with Cups & Balls, or declaim against the Jesuits in the vile hole of an English Coffee House ... The two young gentlemen appear to be very capable of improvement, & the elder of them (Mr Courtenay) to be of a most agreeable character'.3 But Thorpe was writing as a beleaguered Jesuit, and Sir Robert Throckmorton (their grandfather) seems to have been quite satisfied with Walker.4 In June 1790 Elizabeth Gibbes dined with a 'Mr Throckmorton' in Florence,5 but his identity remains uncertain. In 1792, after he had succeeded as 5th Baronet, John Throckmorton returned to Italy with his wife Maria Catherine. They spent the winter in Naples6 and 'lived in Society' with Sir William and Lady Forbes. Later, in April 1793, the four were guided in Rome by Patrick Moir, while Lady Throckmorton introduced the Forbeses to the Arcadian Society; Sir John kept 'a sort of open table' for English Catholics at Rome.7 A Throckmorton ('Frokmorton') was in Venice in May 1793.8 A bust at Coughton, presumed to be of Sir John, is signed 'Christopherus Hewetson modellavit Christopherus Prosperi sculpsit 1800' (Hewetson had died in Rome in 1798).9 Further letters and another diary relating to Sir John and Lady Throckmorton are in the Warwick RO (Throckmorton 0741 (II 2/1-24, and 5/3).
Between January and April 1729 Throckmorton frequented Jacobite circles in Rome, in April sharing an address with the 5th Duke of Hamilton. By 5 May Throckmorton had returned from Naples to Rome, which he left with a Mr Carrington on the 17th (SP 85/16; Walton, 20 Jan., 7 Apr., 5, 19 May 1729).
Mr Thinn, Harry Thinn's son' was travelling with his governor, Downes. They were in Augsburg on 5 September 17051 and 'Thomas Thynne' was in Padua on 20 September 1705.2
Henry Tichborne was entrusted to the Benedictine Dom George Augustine Walker, but their relationship was an unhappy one; Tichborne made a 'very hasty departure' from Rome, leaving Walker 'much dejected' (Thorpe letters MSS, 12 Oct., 14 Dec. 1776).

By 1755 Tierney was acting as merchant, money lender and friend to British travellers in Naples. In 1755 he was forwarding boxes to [John] Parker in Rome,1 and in 1757 he signed a merchants' memorial with his brother William.2 George 'Teerney' signed further British merchants' documents at Naples in 1764 and 1767.3 Tierney acted for, amongst others, Thomas Jones, the 4th Earl of Bristol, James Byres, Sir Watkin Williams Wynn and Allan Ramsay (in 1783); he conducted a gossipy correspondence with William Constable4 and was 'a good friend' to John Hippisley.5 He dealt with Lord Richard Cavendish's creditors on his death in September 1781,6 and advanced £300 to Henry Fothergill 'out of compassion'.4 On his death he left his business to his nephew George Roche.7
Tighe was in Padua on 29 May 1700 and again on 17 March 1705.1 From Rome on 9 May 1705 Christian Cole recommended him to Rosalba Carriera in Venice, where she duly saw him in mid-May.2 He left Venice immediately afterwards to pass the summer in Florence,3 whence he wrote to Cole in Rome in July.4 Tighe was still (or again) in Italy at the same time as Sir John Perceval in 1706-7.5
In Naples 'the Tighes' were among the companions of the Piozzis who were there from November 1785 to February 1786.1 Mr and Mrs Tighe were noticed in Rome by Henry Quin sometime before 1 April 1786,2 and 'Mr and Mrs Yeigh' sat to Angelica Kauffman for a double portrait painted in Rome that year.3
Monsiu Tighe' and Hutchinson, Lord Massereene's tutor, passed through Capua on 4 February 1763 on their way to Naples, and Tighe was there again on 12 March on his way to Rome.1 'Tomaso Tiche' arrived in Venice on 27 May 1763.2 He may have sat to Batoni in Rome (cf. Clark/Bowron 330); a descendant of the family presented Batoni's portrait of Pope Pius VI to the NGI in 1875 (Clark/Bowron 393).



In November 1746 Tilson arrived with others in Naples from Rome;1 in December he commissioned two views from Joseph Vernet in Rome.2


He was travelling with a Mr Stuart and visited Stosch in Rome before going on to Naples (SP 98/32, f.20; Walton, 19 Jan. 1730).

Tisdale was travelling with James Stopford (later 1st Earl of Courtown). They spent the winter of 1723-4 in Rome1 and left 'by way of the Santa Casa of Loreto towards Venice' on 23 April.2 On 10 May 'Philip Tisdall Hibernus' and Stopford were in Padua.3 A portrait by Trevisani (London art market 1955-65) is inscribed 'Tnns.[or]Tnno Tisdele Esqr/Done at Rome by /Francesco Trevisani/1723'.
In the course of his grand tour (1757-61) Lord Titchfield spent a year in Italy. In January 1760 he was in Berlin with Benjamin Langlois en route for Italy (see Langlois), and by November he was said to have been 'long at Turin'.1 He was still there in February 1761, busy mounting debts: '£3000 a year is more than we can afford', wrote his father, '& I believe I told you that £2500 was not to be exceeded. We are perfectly easy & don't doubt the truth of what you say about gaming; and therefore your extraordinary expenses must be owing to the letting your servants cheat you'.2 He was in Florence in October 1761 when he was elected in absentia to Parliament and, sacrificing 'his curiosity to his obedience', he turned home without seeing Rome or Naples.3 On 18 November 1761 he arrived in Venice (listed as the 'marchese di Thiviff Duca di Phouthenent con suo compagno mons. C. Annjhe'),4 where Lady Mary Wortley Montagu had anticipated his arrival.5
Milord Tesfeild' arrived in Venice on 17 November 1789,1 and was in Rome for the winter, his 'merry face' being noticed by Elizabeth Gibbes.2 In 1790, sometime between late April and 17 June, he went from Florence to Leghorn with James Clitherow, Henry Clavering and a Mr Lascelles.3

Mrs Tofts, the celebrated diva, arrived in Venice in December 1711.1 She had not been in good health, but by January 1716 Alexander Cunningham could write that 'Mrs Toffts is improven wonderfully since she came into Italy, and tis said yt as soon as her health will permitt, that she's to be married'. On 18 September 1716 Cunningham reported that Joseph Smith was 'soe much in love wt Mrs Tofts, yt he is fitt for nothing'.2 They were married probably in 1717. Little is known of their life together, although her husband's material success would certainly have suited her mercenary instincts. In later life she suffered 'a long period of shattered intellect, during which she was forever singing snatches of song', and had to be restrained.3 She was buried in the Protestant Cemetery on the Lido. See Joseph Smith.

Dr Tomlinson (a London Physician, who attended Sr R: Grosvenor, who dyd lately at Naples) came hither [to Florence] from that City', wrote Spence in March 1733 (in fact referring to the death of Sir Thomas Grosvenor); Tomlinson gave him a vivid account of being on Vesuvius during an eruption (Spence Letters, 151-2).


Mr Richard Tomson of Signr Trons manufactory at Schio, near Vicenza', met Rawlinson at Pisa on 15 August 1722; they subsequently made excursions together (Rawlinson jnl.MSS).


Alexander Torriano was in Padua on 13 June 1707,1 and was doubtless the Dr Torriano reported in Venice with a Mr Bond on 4 October 1708.2
Torriano met and travelled with Allan Ramsay during the latter's first visit to Italy, sitting to him in Rome in 1738 (Mellerstain); see Allan Ramsay.




Tough lived in Palermo, 'uno dei piu rispettati Negozianti Inglesi in Sicilia', and his name recurs in William Hamilton's diplomatic correspondence in 1786 and 1796-7 (ASN E 674, 684).
Towne was already an accomplished water-colourist when he went to Italy at the age of forty in 1780, and Italy induced some of his finest work.1 When James Irvine met him in Rome, two months after his arrival, he thought Towne 'one of the strangest genius's I have seen, with a very indifferent understanding he has all the gravity and formality of a profound philosopher and deep reasoner, but he is I believe what we call a good sort of man & applies to his art wt great industry'.2 After four months in Rome, Towne went to Naples for a month in March 1781, Thomas Jones being happy to act as cicerone to his 'old Acquaintance'. Their misadventures in search of wild sketching sites led Towne to say 'that however he might admire such Scenes in a Picture - he did not relish them in Nature'.3 Back in Rome Towne made further expeditions in the Campagna, to Nemi, Terni, Albano (Apr. 1781), Tivoli (May) and Ariccia (11 Jul.). By August he had left with John 'Warwick' Smith to return via the Italian Lakes, and he was in England by September. Three volumes of his Italian drawings were presented to the British Museum in 1816 by his executors, to be near those of his friend William Pars.

Mr and Mrs Standish were in Florence in mid-November 1788,1 and 'Mr and Mrs Standish of Standish Hall' arrived in Rome early in December 1788, intending to stay less than two weeks before going on to Naples, and to return to Rome about mid-February.2 On 5 December 1789 Mrs Standish and Elizabeth Gibbes attended a ball given by the Princess Santa Croce in Rome.3 Father Thorpe mentioned them in Rome on 12 December and on 24 April 1790.4 They were in Venice from 30 May to 6 June 1790.5
From a landed Catholic family, Townley had acquired from his French education a certain 'gracefulness', while not altogether escaping from 'the dissipations' of Parisian society.1 On his first visit to Italy in 1767-8 he discovered a consuming interest in the study and collecting of antiquities, to which, being barred by religion from a public career, he devoted the rest of his life. A number of pieces he acquired in Rome in 1768 were already well known. The 'Knucklebone-players' from the Palazzo Barberini, a sarcophagus from the Palazzo Capranica (engraved by Bartoli in 1693), a 'circular urn with battles' from Belisario Amidei which had been engraved by Piranesi, and a faun from the Palazzo Macarani, allegedly restored by Algardi, were among those listed on a receipt from Thomas Jenkins dated 12 August 1768. Also from Jenkins came a bust of Hadrian from Hadrian's Villa, a site which was to yield several more pieces for his collection. From Piranesi in 1768 he bought a pair of Roman altars from the Palazzo Odescalchi, an altar from the Villa Burioni, and a fountain recently discovered between Tivoli and Praeneste; from the antiquarian Pietro Pacilli came the celebrated Hecate from the Palazzo Giustiniani. All these pieces were shipped back to London in 1768-9. In the course of this first visit Townley sat to Hewetson for a marble bust (BM).2 Two notebooks describing his first tour in 1768 are among the Townley papers; they provide his itinerary and record his purchases of pictures, gems, cameos and vases, and reveal that Thomas Patch was acting as his agent in Florence. Another account book refers to his travel in France and Italy between 28 October 1771 and 13 February 1774. In Florence, where he stayed at Hadfield's, he again met Patch, from whom he bought some fragments of the 'Giotto' frescoes from the Carmine (see Patch). He arrived in Rome on 17 February 1772 and was received in audience by the Pope on the 21st. He stayed at the Casa Guarnieri and was at once buying from Piranesi and from Byres (29 'Etruscan' vases on 1 May). From 3 May he was in Naples, where he made the acquaintance, which was to become a warm friendship, of Sir William Hamilton (who sold his first collection of antiquities to the British Museum in that year). Between 20 May and 21 June he travelled in Puglia and Calabria with William Young of Delaford Park and the artist John Brown. From October to December he was in Sicily, buying coins and medals in some quantity and by 27 December 1772 he was back in Naples, where he acquired one of his favourite pieces, the Clytie from the Principe Laurenzano family. At the beginning of February Townley returned to Rome, where he spent most of 1773. Jenkins continued to supply important pieces, including a circular well-head with Bacchic reliefs from the Palazzo Colombrano in Naples and the Head of a Titan, recently uncovered at Hadrian's Villa by Gavin Hamilton. Townley began to deal directly with Hamilton in 1773, his purchases including two busts from the Mattei Collection and a seated comic actor whose discovery at the Villa Fonsega Townley had witnessed. Townley returned to England early in 1774. Later that year, Hamilton provided a group of sculptures that he found at Monte Cagnolo, including the large marble vase now known as the Townley Vase. The Townley Venus and other marbles excavated by Hamilton at Ostia arrived in London in 1778. Townley made a third visit to Italy in 1777. He was reported in Rome by 22 January.3 His purchases included coins, bronzes, glass and, from Piranesi, a colossal marble head of Hercules found at Hadrian's Villa by Hamilton. Henry Blundell, a fellow Catholic and Lancastrian, whom Townley was to advise and encourage as a collector of antiquities, caught up with him in Rome and they travelled together to Naples. Returned to London, Townley continued to buy in Italy through dealers (he settled his account with Jenkins annually), and he also bought in the London sale room. In 1783 Zoffany exhibited his celebrated picture of Charles Townley's Library (Towneley Hall AG, Burnley) in which Townley, with his friends the antiquarian 'Baron d'Hancarville', Charles Greville and the palaeographer Thomas Astle, is shown surrounded by sculptures in the top-lit room at his London house, 7 Park Street (now 14 Queen Anne's Gate). Townley, who was noted for his generosity and hospitality, admitted visitors freely to see the collection. By about 1795 he had laid out some £15,000 on his collections of antiquities, books and paintings. The antiquities were purchased after his death for the British Museum, where the marbles were first exhibited in 1808, the rest of the collection being acquired in 1814. Another reported journey to Rome about 1790, when he is said to have witnessed the excavation of the Lansdowne Hercules,4 is not historical.
Mr Charles Townley painter' was in Rome in November 1773 when he was lent money by his namesake, the famous collector,1 although Hayward recorded the arrival in Rome of 'Mr Townley mezzotinto scraper' in 1774.2 In 1774 he was acting as an agent for prints and drawings on behalf of Charles Rogers.3 From September 1775 to November 1776 he was in Florence, where he made copies of many of the self-portraits in the Uffizi (ten of his black chalk copies were sold Sotheby's, 19 Jun. 1969). He applied for permission to copy 'in disegno' in September and October 1775 and again in June and July 1776.4 In December 1775 Townley's mother died5 and in January 1776 he gave a large ball to revive his spirits.6 Townley ('Incisore') was elected to the Accademia del Disegno in Florence on 14 November 1776,7 and later that month he passed through Parma on his way home.8

Townsend travelled with Rutherford to Naples (they passed through Capua on 2 December 1771)1 and 'Tarrensend' and Rutherford arrived in Venice on 23 May 1772.2 His companion was probably the Rutherford noticed in Florence late in October.3 Patrick Home listed Townsend in Italy 1771-3.4
Townshend had commanded the naval bombardment of Bastia in November 1745, after which his squadron docked at Leghorn. He quickly irritated Horace Mann in Florence. 'If he were not your cousin', Mann told Horace Walpole, 'I would tell you that he is not at all better than many of the bears I have had to deal with ... you cannot conceive the pains I have taken with him'. Townshend may have landed again at Leghorn in early summer 1746 when Mann entrusted him with the antique marble eagle and pedestal for Walpole (Wal. Corr., 19:157, 163, 169; 263, 277, 427).

Col. Townsend' was listed in Florence on 9 September 1769. 1 'Colonel Jervaskund' was introduced by Horace Mann to Cardinal Albani, together with Thomas Brand (1749- 94), Lord Desart and Plover, in a letter acknowledged from Rome on 27 September 1769.2 'Samuel Toursend' arrived in Venice with Desart, Brand and James Berry on 14 January 1770.3
With Sarah Trimmer, Townshend dined with the Flaxmans in Rome in January 17941 and 'Mrs Trimmar' and 'Tomaso Toconsed' were among Lady Spencer's large party in Venice in May.2

Tracy travelled in Italy with a Swiss companion, Dentand, and their travel journal describes a nine-month tour.1 They descended Mont Cenis in six hours in chairs carried by men running 'like Cats'. At Turin they saw a kill at Stupinigi, 'the whole hunt standing in a circle round and the French Horns playing'. They noticed the fruit groves at Genoa, and in Florence despised the Italian Comedy ('the worse kind'). Stopping at Rome only to get a passport, they went straight to Naples. Having previously been delayed between Bologna and Florence by Lady Holland taking all the horses, in Naples they had to stay at an inn 'in a horrid situation where we could see nothing as Lord Holland's Family had taken possession of that that has a view of the sea'. The music at Naples, however, was enjoyable, 'better than in any Part of Italy'. At a concert given at the Teatro di San Carlo for King Ferdinand's coming of age 'the celebrated Gabrieli covered with Diamonds added highly by her surprising Voice to the grandeur of the Spectacle'. There were also the Friday concerts given by the British envoy William Hamilton. They called on the 'great Chymist', the Prince of San Severo. The journal contains accounts of the Catacombs of S.Gennaro, Caserta, Portici, Herculaneum, Vesuvius, Salerno and Paestum, but ends in Naples. Tracy left Venice four months later, on 4 June 1767.2
Trail, the British ambassador's chaplain in Paris, spent 'some months' with the ambassador's son, Francis, Viscount Beauchamp, in Florence1 where Wilkes noticed them in February 1765.2 Trail appears with Beauchamp in a conversation piece by Patch (WSL), an elderly man with a heavy jowl, a book of music in one hand and a flute in his pocket. Boswell found him congenial3 and Trail gave him a flute which he took to Corsica.1
A soldier and a dilettante painter, he was elected to the Accademia del Disegno at Florence in January 1773,1 and was made an honorary member of the Accademia di S.Luca in Rome in February.2 Piranesi dedicated a plate to Peter Traille in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778].

Mr Trant's footman received payment from Sir Thomas Kennedy in Rome in the spring of 1751.1 He was probably the 'Mr Trante' whom Andrew Lumisden met at a hunting party at Montefortino (near Rome) in January 1753.2





In November 1746 Treby requested a passport from Florence to Naples.1 Treby, a Scottish gentleman, 'nephew of the Duchess of Leeds allied to several of the principal families of England and very rich', and his Scottish companion Fane, were given an introduction by Horace Mann to Cardinal Albani in Rome.2 Treby was in Naples by 22 November.3
He was probably also the Trelawny in Rome on 5 November 1712 (see Clarke 1712).
Trelawny was the Duke of Shrewsbury's occasional visitor in 1702-3 and appealed to him when he was imprisoned for debt in September 1703 (Shrewsbury Jnl., 2 Sep., 29 Oct. 1702; 18 Mar., 1 Sep. 1703)



With James Stuart and Nicholas Revett, he was proposed by Sir James Gray in Venice for membership of the Society of Dilettanti (Cust, 77).
Trench spent sixteen years in Italy, where he practised as a history painter. He was not particularly successful, although he enjoyed distinguished patronage from British travellers, particularly from the 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury.  He was first in Rome by 1704. It has been stated that he was in Italy by 1700 (Strickland) but there is no supporting evidence.1 He studied under Giuseppe Chiari (and possibly under Chiari's master, Carlo Maratti, who d. 1713). In 1705 'Enrico Trench Ibernese' was awarded first prize in the third class of the Concorso Clementino at the Accademia di S. Luca (for three drawings after antique statues); in 1706 he received first prize in the second class (for a drawing of The Slaying of Tarpeia), and in 1711 second prize in the first class (for Furius Camillus and the Teacher).2 In 1707, Trench was introduced to Sir John Perceval. On 17 October 1707 Perceval from England expressing the hope that 'the English gentlemen I left at Rome are well' and that Mr Trench 'minds his business and improves' (Perceval subsequently wrote in a marginal note, 'Trench returned some years after and proved a very good history painter'). On 3 December 1707 James Gibbs was able to assure him from Rome that 'Mr Trench goes on in his study very well'.3 But in January 1709 Trench wrote a melancholy letter to Perceval: he was impoverished, 'in so great Want that I cannot do anything except I am helped Speedily' and illness 'causes a great hindrance to my Studdies'.4 A year later, in February 1710, Lord Raby was recommending 'Mr French the English painter at Rome' to Sir William Wentworth,5 and in 1711 John Talman showed 'Mr French' a sketch of a picture by Chiari.6  Early in February 1712 Trench was recommended by the Rev. Dr James Fagan to carry out drawings for the 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury in Naples. Shaftesbury subsequently wrote to Fagan on 13 February and on 19 March he enclosed a memorandum for the artist: 'Being satisfy'd, by good Testimony, of Mr Thrense's Sobriety, and Industry, and, by what I have seen in his hand, of his ability and improving Genius in Design I am ready to accept his Visit to me hither.'7 Shaftesbury also urged Trench to occupy his time before 'leaving Rome in copying from the antique and to bring with him whatever books or prints of his own which would be of use to him'. Trench stayed in Rome for a further month. He was also recorded on 28 March visiting the Church of S.Ignazio with John Talman.  Meanwhile in Naples, according to Lord Shaftesbury's account books, practical considerations were being given to Trench's arrival on 6 April. Throughout his stay in Naples Shaftesbury's accounts show sundry items, books and prints, being purchased for him. Trench remained until 16 September, working on the draft frontispieces and headpieces (later engraved by Simon Gribelin) for the second edition of Shaftesbury's Characteristicks, published posthumously in London in 1714. Trench also acted as intermediary for Shaftesbury in the purchase of works of art for the Earl's friend Sir John Cropley. On 20 June Trench was paid five Pistoles 'for his Trouble in Agency about the five Pieces of Painting bought by my Lord of Signr. Porcinari' (these included a landscape by Claude 'with figures by Luca Giordano' and two by Salvator Rosa).  Trench returned to Rome on 16 September 1712, having been paid for prints and for the cost of his journey. He was also presented with five pistoles and asked to deliver a 'pair of Silk Stockins' for William Kent. By Easter 1713 Trench had moved into lodgings near the Piazza di Spagna; he was probably also the 'Trencer' living with Compton Domvile near the Strada Paolina at Easter 1717.8 According to Vertue, in the following year Trench entered a further competition at the Accademia di S.Luca, winning a second prize in the third class for a drawing of the statue of S.Martina, at the Academy's church.9 Although he may have entered the competition, there is no record of his prize. Kent was a prizewinner in 1714, although according to Vertue 'it is generally allowed that Trench is ye better designer'.10 In August 1714 two unspecified payments (presumably for drawings) were made to Trench by Thomas Coke,11 and on 16 September 1714, Trench was in Padua,12 probably with Kent and Thomas Coke, who were then touring northern Italy.13 Early in April 1717 Coke paid Trench 'on Account of his drawing'.11 Trench had returned to London by 8 June 1718, when Kent wrote from Rome asking 'how Mr Trench suceeds [in England] in his paintings for he has not done one picture here'.14 He set up practice as a painter of historical subjects but without much success. Vertue relates how he sought work from the 4th Earl of Burlington, whom he would have met during his stay in Rome (September 1714 to February 1715), but that Kent was preferred. Trench, as a result, 'took an occasion to write an expostulatory letter to this Nobleman setting forth the difference of merrit on his side, more than Kent'. However, it had no effect except that 'Lord Burlington would read it to Kent, by way of mortification and mirth'.10 Trench returned to Italy in 1723 for a further period, arriving in Rome on 23 October, and staying for a week before going on to Naples. There he studied under Francesco Solimena for two years and acted as agent in the shipment of works of art for the Irish portrait painter Hugh Howard, as described in a letter of 26 May 1724 from Naples.15 Trench also saw to the export of his own paintings, including Fernando Cortes after Titian, which appears on a list of works in the collection of Howard. A further drawing by Trench originating from the Wicklow collection, entitled Reading an Omen (BM) is probably datable to this second period in Naples.15 Trench returned to London in October 1725. His arrival had been anticipated by William Aikman, who wrote to his cousin Sir John Clerk of Penicuik on 15 July 1725 about the decoration of his staircase at Mavisbank House, Midlothian: 'in September next I expect my friend Mr Trench from Italy where he has been these two years past, studying colouring under the famous Solimena. He was master of design having studied ten or twelve years under Carlo Maratti and we expect he will do something in a right manner when he returns'.16 But Trench died in London on 14 November 1726.13





Tresham went to Rome in 1775 apparently intent on becoming a history painter but, as with so many, his ambition was deflected by his success as an agent and dealer and none of his Italian paintings survives.1 On his way to Rome he spent several months in Florence, where he was copying in the Uffizi between 8 May and 16 August 1775. He competed with Downman to copy Rubens's Isabella Brandt, his application supported by Horace Mann and Patch, although the Director, G.B. Pelli, thought Tresham 'poco diligente'.2 He saw Zoffany working on the Tribuna in June.3 Later, on 17 July 1777, Tresham was to be elected to the Florentine Academy,4 but meanwhile by 23 September 1775 he had come to Rome,5 where he remained for thirteen years.  Most of his Rome addresses are recorded. From 1777 to 1779 he was living on the Corso, with William Pars in 1777 and with T.M. Slade in 1778;6 by 26 September 1779 he had joined Nathaniel Marchant and Solomon Delane at the 'Babuina Pallace'7 [probably the Palazzo Piombini on the Via Babuina], and he was presumably the 'Monseur Trez Inglese Protestante' at the Palazzo Piombini in 1780.6 'Monsu Tres Pittore Iglese Eretico - 36' was living at the Stalla Mignanelli, Piazza di Spagna, in 1781-2,8 doubtless the 'pretty set of Apartments' near Trinita dei Monti (once occupied by Thomas Banks) which Mrs Flaxman was looking forward to occupying in 1788 when Tresham finally left Rome.9 Tresham may accordingly be identified as the 'Monsu Try Pittore Inglese - 43' at the Piazza Mignanelli in 1787 and 1788, whose rooms on the second floor were occupied by the Flaxmans in 1788-90.8  Tresham's rooms were in the middle of the artist colony in Rome and he appears to have been particularly friendly with Thomas Jones (who in May 1777 moved into 'Tresham's late lodgings at the Contessina's palace in the Corso',10 although this is not entirely borne out by the Stati delle anime). In April 1777 they had sketched together in the Campagna with Thomas Hardwick and William Pars, and in July they went to see the recently discovered frescoes at the Villa Negroni. There, it appears, Tresham first declared his instincts as a dealer for, said Jones, he bought 'these paintings for 50 Crowns, to be taken off the walls at his Own Expence'.11 Within weeks the Bishop of Derry had bought them all, allegedly for £200,12 and Tresham became increasingly involved with the Bishop. In 1778 he procured a statue of Leda for him,13 in 1780 he staged a 'Grand Entertainment to a large Company' to mark the Bishop's succession as 4th Earl of Bristol,14 and in 1781 Tresham was finishing for the Bishop a painting of Brutus sentencing his two Sons to death and beginning another of The Death of Julius Caesar.15  In April 1779 Tresham paid a month's visit to Naples with a group of English artists including James Northcote, Thomas Banks, Maria Hadfield, Prince Hoare (the painter) and Alexander Day.16 By September he had met Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke)17 with whom he visited the Villa Aldobrandini. Lord Herbert saw Tresham's portrait of John Coxe Hippisley, without totally approving: 'his position seems to me very much forced, & his countenance much older, and with an expression of unhappiness' but, he added, 'the Judges' thought 'the Picture a Master-Piece'. In November he gave Lord Herbert some memoranda for Florence, and in March 1780 he sent Lord Herbert a 'Model of your Friend the King of Prussia' and suggested that 'Old England's honourable reunion with her Colonies', a subject then 'ripening to maturity', would be an appropriate commission for him. In 1783/4 Tresham visited Sicily with Colonel John Campbell (later 1st Baron Cawdor), who was to become his most rewarding patron. The exact date of their tour has not been established, but it was after the earthquake of 5 February 1783 (the effects of which were illustrated by Tresham) and probably before March 1784, when Tresham had acquired a number of [Greek] vases. In May 1784 Tresham and Campbell were noticed together in Rome.18 Tresham later told Farington that Campbell 'gave him money occasionally', [but he had spent] '3 weeks at Trepan [Trepani] in Sicily lying on Chairs & tables'.19 Many of Tresham's views in Sicily were seen in his Rome studio in March 1785,20 and many were eventually sold from the Cawdor collection in 1953 (Sotheby's, 14 Oct.) and 1962 (Sotheby's, 23 May). Though Tresham was primarily a history painter, these pen and wash drawings reveal a competent landscape painter.  In March 1784 John Parkinson visited Tresham's studio in Rome. He noted 'his Vases, his Cephelia [Cephalus?], his Adventures of Sappho, his Hyperides pleading before the Areopagus, and his designs from Pastor Fido'.21 Of these, Le Avventure di Saffo [Rome, 1784] was a volume of 18 dramatic aquatints reminiscent of Fuseli, inspired by Verri's romance of the same title published in 1780. Charles Long (who had already seen Tresham in Florence, presumably in November 1786, according to Long's itinerary) met him in Rome in December 1786 and the following April he wrote that Tresham seemed to be working 'very hard'.22 He had then begun an Adam and Eve which he was to exhibit in London at the RA in 1789. He also painted two unidentified pictures for Colonel Campbell which were sent back to England in March 1788 (see John Campbell). Tresham's final years in Rome were also much concerned with dealing for Campbell. He acted as his agent with Canova, Campbell marking the association by commissioning a portrait from H.D. Hamilton of Tresham and Canova in the sculptor's studio (priv. coll.). Tresham bought for him panels by 'Masaccio' from the Casa Pucci in Florence, and in 1787-8 both were buying antiquites from Pacetti.23 Elizabeth Cooper thought Tresham would be leaving Rome for England in March 1788;24 it appears that he returned home with Campbell, leaving Rome on 15 April and passing through Venice, to reach Paris by July.25 Tresham continued his career as painter and dealer on his return. In 1799 he published a rather awful poem Rome at the Close of the Eighteenth Century. A Poem with Notes [1799]. He never quite shook off a troublesome reputation he acquired in Rome and even in 1803 Marchant was saying in London that 'the experience that was had of Tresham in Rome rendered it improbable but that the Academy would feel the disadvantage of having him a Member'.26

Trevor made the grand tour in 1773 with a Christ Church friend, John Eckersall. They were in Naples in January and February, passing through Capua on 15 January and 23 February.1 In April they were in Rome,2 and on 16 May 1773 they arrived in Venice.3 Trevor was back in England by 5 August, when he married the daughter of the Canon of Christ Church.  Ten years later he brought her to Turin, where he had been appointed British envoy extraordinary (and was later in 1789 to be made plenipotentiary) at the court of Savoy-Sardinia.4. They arrived on 9 October 1783 and soon became well liked. Sir James Hall met them in June 1784 at their country residence, 'down the Po on the right hand a good way up a steep hill', and found Trevor 'an agreeable man'.5 Arthur Young found him 'a man of deep sense and much observation',6 and Horace Walpole described Mrs Trevor as 'gentle and pleasing'.7 Trevor was a fastidious proof-reader of the Castle of Otranto for the printer Bodoni (to whom thirty-three of his letters survive).8 Trevor commissioned from him an edition of his father's poems (Britannia..., 1792); he also lent Bodoni some medals by Matthew Bolton. There is little evidence of any affection for the fine arts: he was applying to visit the Certosa di Pavia in 1783;9 in 1791 he was 'much pleased' with Harriet Carr's amateur paintings,10 and he owned a gem by Nathaniel Marchant.11  Trevor took regular periods of leave with his wife (mostly to Switzerland), and in 1785 they travelled around Italy with their relations the Hampdens (see Thomas, 2nd Viscount Hampden). During these absences Thomas Jackson, his secretary, acted as chargé d'affaires. Trevor remained in post during the French invasion of Italy, and was first involved in the evacuation of English residents from Nice in October 1792,12 but he was on leave when the French invaded Turin in 1798. He did not return and his recall was officially delivered by Thomas Jackson in November 1799.
Carrying an urgent message from Horace Mann in Florence to the Admiralty in London, he remained in his chaise 'without eating, drinking, or sleeping' completing the journey in two weeks (Wal.Corr., 24:376-7, 380).


Trippel applied in Rome on 20 May 1791 to send a basso-relievo to Ancona, and again on 16 September 1792 to send a modern portrait in marble.1 He was in the entourage of Prince Augustus at the beginning of 1793,2 but had died by 1 March 1794.3


In April 1757 Trotter's father wrote that he must send his son 'in about two years to Italy'.1 It was later stated that he was in Italy for sixteen years and was back in Dublin by 1773.2 According to Hayward, Trotter was taken prisoner in Rome and 'Carred to Spayne' in 1762.3 But he was back in Rome by 1764, listed as living in the same house as Solomon Delane in the Strada Felice, Rome.4 After his return to Dublin, Trotter married twice and practised as a portrait painter.
He was travelling with Tomson and the painter John Smibert and was probably related to Mrs Trotter, the sister of Andrew Hay, the painter and dealer (see John Smibert).
Troubridge sailed into Naples on 19 September on the Culloden after the battle of the Nile. On 28 March 1799 Nelson sent him from Palermo to capture the islands of Ischia and Procida (31 March). He landed at Naples for the siege of St Elmo (June), and in September he secured the evacuation of the Roman territory by the French, for which he was decorated by Ferdinand IV. He spent the winter of 1799-1800 in Palermo (DNB).
He showed an interest in the archeological remains on Dominican sites around Rome,1 and was Prior of the Dominican convent of S.Clemente at the time of his nomination as Bishop of Ossory.2




In December 1704 Tufnell delivered a letter from Richard Hill, the English envoy in Turin, to the Duke of Shrewsbury in Rome.1 Shrewsbury recorded meeting him in Rome with Thomas Frankland and Metcalfe Robinson on 6 December 1704, and again ('Mr Tufnail') on 6 February 1705.2 'Samuel Tufnaile' (with Robinson, Frankland and others) was in William Kerr's party at Padua the following June.3


Tufton had been expected to join the Rev. Edward Rolle and other English visitors in Rome at the Casa Guarnieri,1 and at Easter 1753 'Milord Tesseta' / 'Tenneta' [although Tufton did not succeed to the title of Thanet until 4 December 1753] was staying there with with Frederick, Lord North, and his step-brother, the 2nd Earl of Dartmouth.2 In April 1753 the three visited Naples (they passed through Capua on 20 April, when a Captain Anderson was listed next to Tufton, possibly his tutor).3 Thereafter Tufton stayed some time in Rome. He sat to Batoni (Clark/ Bowron 177; priv. coll.) and in 1754 he was said to have been at Tivoli with the Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of Essex and Lord Bolingbroke, while Richard Wilson sketched the ruins of the Villa of Maecenas; a version of Wilson's painting was later [1794] purchased from the 9th Earl of Thanet by Sir George Beaumont and Farington recorded it had been 'begun in Italy, and finished in England'4 (now Tate Gallery).

Leaving England in April 1711 he saw the vineyards at Frontignac and apparently went on to Italy (Tull, Supplement to the Essay on Horse-Hoing Husbandry [1740], 254-5).
In 1710, when he was a serving naval officer, Lord Tullibardine sailed from Barcelona to Genoa,1 and went on to Venice with a clergyman, Oliver.2 His portrait in miniature by Rosalba Carriera (priv. coll.) may have been painted on this visit.3 Having left the navy and joined up with the Earl of Mar, Tullibardine came to the Jacobite court at Pesaro on 25 March 1717.4 On 23 April he set out for France, with Brigadier Colin Campbell of Ormadale.
Turnbull was first in Italy as governor to Thomas Watson, gathering material for his Treatise on Ancient Painting [1740] and Curious Collection of Ancient Paintings [1741]. Camillo Paderni provided many engravings for him, and he owed 'Camillo' £15 in 1740.1 He may have been the 'Trumbull' who advised John Clephane in 1739 on modern artists in Italy.2 See Hon. Thomas Watson.  For Turnbull's second and more eventful visit to Italy in 1744-6, see Horatio Walpole.
In Rome Turnbull was acquainted with Robert Crone, Nathaniel Dance, Colin Morison and Angelica Kauffman.1 Andrew Lumisden missed his 'agreeable and instructive company' when he went to Naples in January 1765.2 Dr Turnbull may be the Turnbull who (with Robert Fitzgerald and John Wilbraham) accompanied Thomas Skipwith to Greece and Asia Minor in the spring.3
Described as 'one of the most eccentric men who ever sat in Parliament',1 Turner was included in several caricature groups painted in Italy in 1751-c.1760. Reynolds painted him twice in 1751, once with a Mr Cook, Dr William Drake and John Woodyeare (Rhode Island School of Design), and once with Sir William Lowther, Joseph Leeson and 'Huet' (priv. coll.). He was also caricatured by Patch in a group formerly at Kirkleatham (now WSL), and has been tentatively identified (with Lowther and Drake) in another (unattributed) conversation piece formerly at Kirkleatham (YCBA).
Turner described his tour of 1768-9 in a series of stilted and dutiful letters addressed to his uncle James Leigh (Turner letters MSS). He travelled with Richard Paul Jodrell, and William Patoun was their guide. On 1 October he wrote from Florence, saying that the 5th Duke of Devonshire was there and Sir Watkin Williams Wynn was expected; he had already passed through 'Parma, Regio, Modena, & Bologna, in all which towns I saw several very fine original pictures, as Mr Patoun tells me, for I do not pretend to be a judge myself'; he was then planning to set out on 15 October for Naples. But he was still in Florence on 21 October, when he attended, with Jodrell and Patoun, the dinner held to mark Horace Mann's investiture as Knight of the Bath.1 He was in Naples by 15 November,2 and wrote on the 29th (when he was about to dine with Lord Exeter) saying he proposed returning to Rome at the end of December. On 25 January and 16 February 1769 he wrote from Rome, where he had seen the funeral of Pope Clement XIII and had evidently sat to Batoni. His fine three-quarter-length portrait, which must have been painted in 1769,is nevertheless dated 1768 (Manchester AG: Clark/Bowron 319). By 11 March he was in Venice with Patoun.3



At Rome in October 1704 Turner, Henry Edwin and [John] Scudamore, with their 'Governors', dined with the Duke of Shrewsbury.1 In January 1705 Turner with Timothy Aubrey took pastel colours from Christopher Cole in Rome to Rosalba Carriera in Venice, Turner entertaining hopes of sitting to her for his portrait.2 On 14 February 1705 Thomas Turner was in Padua with Aubrey and Edwin.3
In April 1774 Father Thorpe wrote that the 'Abbe Turner is [the Duchess of Kingston's] master of languages'.1 It was presumably the same Abbé Turner whom the Ramsays encountered in Rome between January and April and in July 1783.2



Turnor made the grand tour on leaving Cambridge, travelling through France, Switzerland and Italy (DNB). He was recommended by Horace Walpole to Horace Mann,1 and may have been the 'Tarner' in Florence in 1780,2 and the 'Edmondo Turnor' who arrived in Venice on 31 January 1781.3

Encouraged by his friendship with Charles Bonnet of Geneva, Turton sought out scientists in all the principal centres on his Continental tour in 1763-7.1 He met James Martin at Horace Mann's in Florence on 20 November 1763, in Rome on 23 December (although he is also said to have spent Christmas Day at Siena1), and again in Naples on 4 January 1764.2 David Garrick was also at Naples and one of his letters indicates that Turton, on Garrick's recommendation, had met Francesco Algarotti the previous autumn (perhaps in Florence).3 In April 1764 Turton met the Rev. Richard Kaye at Rome, and in June he was in the Duke of York's party at Padua ('juges des Sottises qui j'ai faites'), and again in Venice,4 where he exchanged notes on 'soap plaister' with Baretti. Turton later attended Garrick on the journey to Munich in July (see Garrick).
Laurence Sterne's 'gentle Sally', she set off in 1764 (via Paris) to recover her health at Naples, where Sterne met her in March 1766 (Sterne Letters, 223n2).

Lord Tweeddale travelled in the Veneto at the end of 1719 with two other Scots, John Crosse and Dean Gregory.1 In August 1720 Tweeddale alone was reported to have set out from Florence to Hanover.2
Conceivably the 'Mr T.' who spoke with Joseph Spence in Italy in Florence in 1740 and in Florence and Rome in the spring of 1741 (Spence Anecdotes, 2: 538-47, 660-79).
After 1730 Twisden spent all his time travelling until his death at Granada on 30 July 1737.1 He was nearly four years in Italy accompanied by [the Rev. Charles?] Brown, who held a living adjoining the Twisden estate in Kent. According to Richard Pococke, Brown had been present at the siege of Gibraltar as chaplain to a regiment.2  They went from Milan to Padua on 16 January,3 and on to Venice.4 By 27 February Twisden was on his way to Rome with the 6th Earl of Salisbury and others,5 but his visit must have been very short, for he was in Bologna sometime between April and May,6 and by 22 May he was back with Lord Salisbury in Venice,7 where he spent several weeks. Martin Folkes saw him there in June and July8 and it was probably at this time that Twisden sat to Rosalba Carriera (the portrait sold Sotheby's, 18 Nov. 1959). On 16 July Twisden and Brown left Venice for Germany 'with a design to be in Italy again by the beginning of the winter; for they have seen but a small part of it yet'.9 By the end of November they had come via Turin to Florence (where Brown was apparently listed as 'Bristow of London').10 Pococke saw them there on 31 December and 10 January 1734, and then in Rome on 23 January.2  Their subsequent movements are not well documented. In 1735 Twisden had 'open dealings' with Jacobites11 and on 16 September he attended the second meeting of the Jacobite lodge.12 Twisden commissioned Roman views from Panini, of which there were six at Bradbourne in 1787; a drawing by Panini from Twisden's collection is now in the RIBA. Twisden was last recorded in Italy in January 1736, at Florence with John Dixon.13
Twiss visited Voltaire at Ferney in September 17681 and wrote in 1776 that he had visited 'the greatest part of Italy', without a companion 'excepting a few small excursions', and specifically mentioning Paestum, Rome and Florence.2


Lord Tylney spent nearly half his life as an elegant exile in Italy. From 1752 he was comfortably based in Florence, although he generally wintered in Naples, and his considerable wealth made him a leading member of the Anglo-Florentine community, even though his 'understanding was not bright'.1 He was something of an enigma, as Robert Harvey explained: 'I coud not avoid thinking of his superb palace on Epping forest & comparing it with his neat but small house here'; he was 'an unhappy man who coud not resist the temptations & instigations of a passion, contrary to reason, & at which nature shudders, which has banish'd him a (willing) exile from his country'.2 Lady Mary Coke correctly said Tylney was 'very much settled in this Country [Italy]' and imagined that he had 'no thoughts of ever returning to England'.3  The ostentatious decoration of his 'pretty house [near the Carmine] and a small garden where he has a great quantity of golden pheasants'4 caused comment. William Beckford of Fonthill noted that he lived 'in a fine house all over blue and silver, with stuffed birds, alabaster Cupids, and a thousand prettinesses more'.5 'One apartment [was] hung with yellow paper ... now adjoining with prints with flower'd borders for frames which has an exceedingly good effect [,] if this house was in an Italians possession they would pass it off as a palace abounding with beauties, & worthy the observations of strangers.'6  Tylney gave a dinner, 'the best and most magnificent I ever saw', after Horace Mann was invested with the Order of Bath in 1768.7 Tylney was clearly a confidant of Mann and Lord Cowper commented that Tylney's presence was 'a great resource for him'.8 Tylney's generosity was also shown in his allowing any English visitor to use his theatre box in Florence when he was away in Naples,9 and in Naples he 'contributed much more to the diversion of that city' where he hosted a public ball in 'a most spacious fine House'.10 He was several times visited in Italy by his nephews, Charles and James Long, and in May 1764 Gibbon met Tylney in Milan en route for Venice with James (see James Long).  His connections with the arts appear to have been casual. He was listed as a subscriber to Lord Charlemont's Academy for British artists in Rome in May 1752,11 but he does not seem to have collected (even though he was made a member of the Accademia del Disegno in Florence in 176612), and his only commission of note was apparently a figure of Bacchus by Wilton which Horace Mann noted in September 1753.13 Tylney appears in a conversation group by Patch (YCBA) and in a portrait drawing by the same artist (Fry collection). He was perhaps more interested in music, and was elected to the committee of the Florentine Accademia degli Armonici in 1774.14 In October 1781 when he was moving to Naples for the winter he sold the furniture from his Florentine house as 'his return to Florence is quite uncertain'.15 But less than a year before his death in 1783 he had been described as being 'as hearty as a brick'.16 He died in Naples and his tomb is at Leghorn;17 his great fortune passed to his nephew James Long. See also Thomas Chase and Josiah Child.

Tyrone was travelling with a German companion, Kuettner. In October 1793 they went on a 'little excursion' to Piedmont from Turin with John Rushout.1 In January 1794 Tyrone was in Rome, on the 27th dining with Archi bald Douglas, Charles Ballard and the Benthams.2 In May he was in Venice with Kuettner, Douglas and Ballard,3 but he soon returned to Rome and went on to Naples, one of a 'prodigious number of young Lords' to do so that year.4 Lady Webster alleged that in Naples Tyrone and Jeffries were at the head of 'a bad lot of drinking Irish'.5
Dr Tyrrell was attending John Fotheringham in Lucca in August 1737 (see Fotheringham). In October and December 1739 his name recurs in Sir Roger Newdigate's letters from Florence,1 and on 30 October 1742 Horace Mann described how 'Dr Tyrrell famous for great cures' had declined to assist a lady 'sorely afflicted' by scurvy, 'saying that though his mercurial unctions have been so efficacious' in this case the scurvy had taken such root that he despaired 'of giving her any relief'.2 Acting for Ralph Howard, Tyrrell wrote him entertaining letters from Florence,3 taking a proprietary interest in the comings and goings of Irish travellers. On 7 August 1752 he reported the arrival of Robert Rochfort and continued 'I sent down the Nile yesterday a damn'd large Parmesan Cheese, & a Cargo of Gessoes for his father; I dayly expect Lord Lanesborough's son [Brinsley Butler] recommended to me by honest Dawson, to whom a thousand compliments from me; if you want wine, oil, cheese, pray lay your commands freely & sans facon, on, dear Sir, your most obedt & most devoted humble servant, James Tyrrell'. Otherwise signing himself 'Hippocrates', he referred to the Arno as 'the Nile', Leghorn 'our Tuscan Alexandria', and Charles Martin as 'our Tuscan Raphael in the crayon way'. Delays, account discrepancies and mishaps, disgrazia, were explained away with the imperturbability of long experience and his services included advice on the care of the objects he despatched: 'in case of dust', he wrote on 26 November, 'order your servants to rub the Bustoes Pedestals & Stands, hard with an old linen clout, but no sand or any other stuff'. On 26 January 1753 he sent a list of pictures, fourteen in all, any of which Howard might like to have copied by the same man who had already done the Van Dyck's Bentivoglio and Charles V for him and he urged him to have handsome frames made 'here & neatly gilt; as I've done now for a parcel of Pictures which I sent away last Saturday for Mr Leeson'. For each picture there was a catalogue number, a description of the subject with the measurements; thus no. 80 read 'Hercules between Virtue & vice; Virtue represented by Minerva, & vice by Mrs Brimstone venus with her little Pimps about her; a noble & rich composition by Rubens: six feet broad, & five feet'. The final letter is dated 20 July 1753, when he boasts of yet another Irish patron, 'Mr [Robert] Clements, son of our Irish Treasurer', for whom Don Pietro Belloni was hard at work. 'I am heartily glad that his Scagliolo Tables please you so much, & don't doubt but Mr Clements will like his also'.  James Martin visited him in Florence in November 1763,4 and Tyrrell is heard of again as a physician in October 1769 when a young English cavalier was brought from Rome to be innoculated under the direction of Dr Tyrrell;5 he may also have been the 'Thyorll' recorded in Florence in 25 November 1769.4
In September 1733 Stosch reported from Florence that Tyrrell had been found by the Grand Duke 'when he was a child in the streets of Prague, where he was begging. He took him into his service and from being a Page he gradually rose to being a Gentleman of the bedchamber, and was afterwards created Count. The Grand Duke hates him personally and for two years has not wanted to behold him'.1 He was presumably the Tyrrell who showed the palace of Guerini (Florence) to the Marquess of Blandford [previously Viscount Rialton] in 1722,2 the 'Scotsman Tirel' who offered to show the Pretender the sights of Florence in the same year,3 and Edward Gascoigne's 'Mr Tyrrel' at Florence in November 1725.4 He played an instrumental role in the purchase and shipping of the Duke of Beaufort's 'famous rich cabinet', see Henry, 3rd Duke of Beaufort. Tyrrell was held responsible by Stosch and Skinner for the arrest of the jeweller William Dugood in Florence in September 1733, Stosch then describing him as an 'agent and declared minister of the Pretender',5 and Horace Mann called him as much when reporting his death on 2 January 1753.6
Tyrwhitt may have been travelling with Charles Hardy; both accompanied the Rev. George Berkeley and Compton Domvile in Rome in January 1717.1 The same group (less Hardy) were in Naples in March,2 and Tyrwhitt and Hardy visited Padua in May.3



John Udny came to Venice in 1757 as a young businessman 'well versed in affairs of the City'.1 He worked as a junior partner with the elderly Joseph Smith who in 1760 successfully nominated him as his successor as British consul,2 Udny being accredited early in 1761.3 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu in February 1761 'did not know till yesterday Mr Udney is Consul, which it seems he has been some time'.4 Udny lived in the house which Smith had originally bought from Thomas Williams, while Smith lived in the adjoining property he had built; when Smith made his will on 5 April 1761 he made Udny his executor and left him two portraits, one of Williams, but nine years later 'by reason of the frequent absence from Venice of Mr John Udny', Smith added a codicil leaving the portraits to his wife and making Richie his executor.5 Udny was said to have taken the courtesan Gertrude Corradini as his expensive mistress, but by 1764 she was being kept by John Wilkes.6  Like his mentor, Udny was soon involved in dealing in works of art, and in 1762 he was employing Henry Matthews, formerly a manager with Rutherfurd & Jackson at Leghorn, 'in the Way of Virtu'.7 When in 1763 Udny lost some £10,000 by the collapse of merchant banks in Hamburg and Holland (a consequence of the Seven Years War), he extracted himself largely through the sale of works of art. Smith, who must have felt in some degree responsible, allowed him to sell in 1763 to the 4th Duke of Marlborough four volumes of drawings once in the Bonfiglioli collection and to export Mantegna's Samson and Delilah (now NG London). Udny's private collection grew. In June 1765 he showed Boswell his pictures 'of the Venetian school';8 by 1771 he was described as having, beside 'very genteel manners', 'an admirable taste in pictures, and possesses himself no inconsiderable collection'.9 In 1773 he was using the Venetian painter Zais to authenticate old master paintings,10 and in May the same year he showed Patrick Home some cartoons 'of considerable merit', probably 'by some of Raphael's Scholars'.11  Between the departure of the resident Sir James Wright on 7 June 1773 and the arrival of his successor, John Strange, on 28 August 1774, Udny acted as chargé d'affaires in Venice.12 He then went to Florence, but on his journey broke his arm at Fontebassa having been thrown from his carriage; on 17 December he was able to go on to Rome.13 On his return journey in February 1775 he travelled with Romney from Florence to Venice, where he let Romney stay in his house and procured for him 'everything [he] wished to copy'; Romney also mentioned there was then 'something of a misunderstanding' between Udny and Strange, the new resident.14 It was at this time that Udny, through 'clever management and address' acquired at Venice the Vitturi collection which he bought with Thomas Slade but, Udny's finances proving inadequate, Slade took the whole after agreeing to 'pay a certain sum of money to Sir John Dick to resign in his [Udny's] favour the consulship of Leghorn'.15  Udny was officially told of his new appointment in July 1776 and he arrived at Florence on 9 August. He came to Florence from Leghorn at the end of October to be presented to the Grand Duke and again on 15 November, on hearing that his patent of office was arriving.16 In 1777 Udny married Selina Clevland who had arrived in Florence in April, travelling with her sister, Matilda, and her cousin, the Swiss Baron Guiger de Pragens. In September 1777 Thomas Pelham saw Mr and Mrs Udny in Florence and commented on the consul's affairs: in Venice he had always 'lived in a hansome manner & spent a great deal in Pictures, not outrunning his Income & I believe not saving much; the Consulship at Leghorn is more profitable & there are few occasions & temptations to Extravagance'.17 But in April 1778 Horace Mann said that although Udny was hoping 'to mend his shattered fortune' he couldn't understand 'how he scrambles out of all these difficulties, he has bought many pictures but finds no purchasers'.18 Leghorn became less profitable with the onset of French hostilities in 1779, as Udny complained in February.19 He was charged with maintaining a fleet for the relief of Minorca, his budget being supplied by Horace Mann in Florence; despite Udny's financial background, Mann was left to complain in September 1783 that his time was being taken up 'most disagreeably in examining the accounts of the irregular Mr Udny relating to the miserable and most expensive defence of Minorca'.20  Udny's activity was by no means confined to the siege of Minorca. In November 1779 John Coxe Hippisley, in Leghorn with Lord Herbert, cryptically noted 'At the Consul's, damn'd good Hospitality, Pimping, etc., etc.', at precisely the time Mrs Udny was giving birth to their son, John Robert21 (their only other child, a daughter Julia, was born before April 1784). In December 1783 Udny was in the Pitti Palace with Allan Ramsay and his son John.22 His own collection attracted increasing attention. In January 1784 Dr Parkinson noticed a Fortune and Lot by Salvator Rosa, a Holy Family by Carlo Dolci and 'the Dannae of Corregio', while listening to Udny's 'very curious & amusing' anecdotes of how his pictures had been acquired.23 Udny's Danae (a copy of the celebrated picture by Correggio in the Borghese) was then considered to be 'One of the Finest Paintings that can be seen',24 and in January 1785 Lord Grey de Wilton was told it had come from the Orléans ['Orban'] collection.25 In April 1784 Charles Parker had observed that Udny was wanting to sell his 'very fine' collection 'for the benefit of his Family, but the Purchase is too considerable for any private man'.26 In September 1787 James Robson spent 'most of the day in seeing & examining [Udny's] Pictures',27 and in November Thomas Watkins was unable to meet Udny who was away 'in pursuit of paintings, in which he deals very largely'.28  Throughout this period Udny was sending pictures to his brother Robert who was assembling in London a considerable old master collection. Early in 1788 Udny sold to the Pope, through [Gavin?] Hamilton, for 3000 crowns an Assumption by 'Fra Bartolommeo de S Marco' removed by the Bishop from the church in Pistoia,29 and the following February and March he was being sent pictures from Florence-copies of del Sarto, Raphael, Reni and Correggio (Ecce Homo and the Danae)-and trying to export others by Raphael (a Madonna with S John) and Bandinelli (Martyrdom of S Lawrence).30 Udny's taste appears to have been catholic, for he also supplied Sir William Forbes with three drawings by Giles Hussey of the Pretender.31  From 31 May 1787 to 13 February 1788 Udny had acted as chargé d'affaires in Florence, taking over from Horace Mann's nephew Horatio until the arrival of Lord Hervey.32 In his last ten years, when he was in his seventies, Udny apparently became a respected and genial figure among British travellers. Although Sarah Bentham found him 'very suddenly taken ill' and unable to 'Receive his Company' in March 1794,33 his health was generally robust. In September 1795 he travelled from Leghorn to Venice with the singer Mrs Billington and her brother.34 The Wynne sisters in 1796 thought him 'the best old man in the World'; he gave Betsey 'such a hearty kiss in the midst of the street' that she felt 'rather ashamed'.35 By then the French invasion was severely disrupting the lives of the British residents, and in June 1796 Udny was amongst those who sailed from Leghorn to Corsica.36 In November and December he was in Rome,37 and in April 1797 he arrived in Elba from Florence with 'a dreadful account of the miserable condition of all Italy'.38 He probably returned to London soon after, for he died there in January 1800. A sale of his pictures took place at Christie's in April, their provenances given as 'the Colunna Palace', and 'the Florence Gallery, and that of Capo di Monte belonging to the King of Naples, ... all of the Parma Collection';39 a second sale of his pictures took place at Christie's on 28 May 1802.  See also John Udny and Udny.
Said to have been the British vice-consul at Leghorn,1 where he was certainly living in 1790 (when he subscribed to Mrs Barry's Maria, a Persian Slave). (Consul John Udny, 1727-1800, had one legitimate son, John Robert Udny, b. 1779, who became a colonel).
Described in his obituary as 'one of the old breed of true English gentlemen',1 he came to Italy with his wife and daughter in 1769, when his older brother John was already well-established as the British consul in Venice. Although Robert amassed a considerable collection of old masters from Italy, principally through his brother's agency, records of his own visits to Italy are scant. The Udny family were in Turin in September2 and at Rome by December.3 On 22 April Udny exported ten old master paintings from Rome,4 and on 22 May he arrived in Venice with his family.5  In July 1775 'Mr and Mrs and Miss Udny', presumably the same, who had been at Rome, were returning to England.6  In 1778 Piranesi dedicated two plates in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi to Robert and one to Maria Udny. Robert's only daughter Maria (by his first wife) m. 1785 Sir William Cunynghame of Livingstone and Milncraig.


Unwin & Faesch', merchants at Leghorn signed a memorial in March 1743, and 'Mattia Univin' signed another in May 1744.1 Unwin died at Leghorn on 2 November 1786, his gravestone in the Leghorn cemetery describing him as 'upwards of fifty years a respectable merchant of this place'.2
For his earlier itinerary, see Topham Beauclerk, whom Lord Ossory eventually left in Venice in late July/early August 1764. With Richard Brompton, who had included both of them in his conversation piece painted in Venice for the Duke of York, Ossory came to Parma on 12 August. It was then said that he was bound for Genoa to rejoin the Duke of York and that Brompton was bound for Rome,1 but they were together in Bologna on the 19th2 and in Florence by the 31st. There Ossory met Edward Gibbon, who thought him rather immature, perhaps not very bright, but with, nevertheless, a great affection for pictures; he added 'il a un peintre dans sa suite' - doubtless Brompton.3 Gibbon's judgment was not supported the following year by Horace Walpole who thought Ossory 'one of the most sensible amiable young men I ever saw'.4 Ossory remained in Florence until at least the end of September.5  He bought or commissioned several works of art. In November 1763 in Florence he showed James Martin a somewhat damaged Pietro da Cortona of David and Goliath which he had bought from Thomas Patch and the following July Martin noted that Angelica Kauffman was to copy Titian's Child playing with a Dog in the Strozzi Palace [Clarissa Strozzi; Berlin] for Lord Ossory, who had also commissioned a Stormy landscape with Dido and Aeneas from Delane.6 In Rome Ossory was evidently in close contact with Gavin Hamilton, with whom he corresponded in 1767-70 after he had left Italy.7 He bought several old masters and antiquities from Hamilton in this period, and two of his own paintings, a Juno (May 1767) and an Agrippina (winter 1767/8); he bought a third, Achilles and Hector, from the 4th Duke of Bedford in 1767 (see Francis, Marquess of Tavistock).
Clotworthy Upton was listed in Capua on 10 March 1753 with Brinsley Butler, Robert Rochfort and others.1 He was possibly the 'C. Upton' who wrote to Lord Charlemont from Turin on 25 July and from Genoa on 15 September 1759.2 He certainly passed the winter of 1766-7 in Naples with Lord Holland and his party, see Henry, 1st Baron Holland.  His last visit to Italy in 1773-5 was made with his wife, an amateur artist of some distinction. They were in Switzerland from at least November 1771 (when their eldest son was born in Geneva) to September 1773.3 In October 1773 they were in Florence, Upton being presented at Court on the 30th.4 'Mr and Mrs Upton & Child' arrived in Rome in 1774, Mrs Upton being then described as modelling in 'clay & wax'.5 Their daughter Elizabeth Albana was born at Albano in August 1775, and they had returned to England by 1776 when Upton was created Baron Templetown. Piranesi later dedicated a plate to Mrs Upton in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778]; for Mrs Upton's subsequent visits to Italy, see Elizabeth, Baroness Templetown.

Roberto Valentine inglese', flautist and composer, dedicated his op.2 flute sonata, published in Rome in 1708, to Sir Thomas Samwell.1 A 'Roberto Valentino-Ing. Cato' was living in the Strada della Vite in Rome in 1740 and 1747 (his age given as 60 in 1740 and 62 in 1747), with his wife 'Giulia Bellotti' and son Patrizio.2  He was conceivably the 'Mr Vallentin' mentioned by William Kent in a letter from Rome of 26 January 1713.3
With the merchants Adams and Warrington, Valline signed a merchants' memorial in June 1786 at Naples.1 Valline was an old friend of Captain Robert Scott of Rosebank who met him in Naples on 29 May 1787 (and described Warrington as his business partner).2


Young Mr Vane' was in Rome in November 1759, intent on marrying a Sienese girl which, Cardinal Albani told Horace Mann, would ruin him and dishonour his family; by December the girl had been paid off (Lewis 1961, 181).

Vannini's hotel in Florence on the Piazza Soderini was much frequented by English travellers and, according to William Patoun writing c.1766, it was generally considered to be as good as Charles Hadfield's (see above, p. xlviii). In 1763 the painter Matthew William Peters had stayed at the Hotel Carraio, known as Vannini's English house (see Peters). It was maintained by an Englishwoman and in December 1770 Mrs Miller wrote that the English 'will have a real loss in old Mrs Vanini, when she departs this life; and I wish, for their sakes, her daughter-in-law may imitate the example she sets her: her son also behaves quite well in his station ... her attentions are such as I have never before experienced from any person in her situation'.1 The Duke of Gloucester stayed at Maria Vannini's inn in November 1771.2 By 1775 Attilia and Giovanni Vannini (presumably Maria's son and daughter-in-law) were keeping good inns in Florence3 and, for example, James Edward Smith in 1786 and William Theed in 1790 both stayed at 'Vannini's'.




According to John Ramsay's diary (where the name is variously spelled 'Ventner', 'Venter', 'Ventire') Venture was in Rome between December 1782 and March 1783, frequently in the company of James Byres. On 27 February Ramsay enigmatically described a meeting of 'English Gentlemen' in Rome, summoned by Lord Breadalbane, to consider the 'oppression' of Venture by English gentlemen. On 12 March Ramsay mentioned 'articles of agreement' between Venture and Mr Jenkins, Venture's case having been drawn up by a Monsignor Erskine (Ramsay jnl.MSS).




John Vernon, an English traveller in Italy with a Mr Cross, was arrested for rape in Naples and put on trial for his life.1 He had entered into an affair with his washerwoman's daughter (apparently called Madelina Manfredi)2 and had dressed her in men's clothes so that she could go with him to Sicily; the girl's parents caught her en travesti and made her swear againt Vernon. In January 1753 Captain Augustus Hervey contrived Vernon's escape from the Neapolitan gaol and sent him by sea to Civitavecchia.
In May 1779 Swinburne met 'Vernon' at Horace Mann's house in Florence.1 Vernon was still in Florence in November, when Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) accompanied him, 'seemingly a good kind of young man', to the Teatro Nuovo on the 7th and to Lord Cowper's on the 10th.2 By 8 January 1780 Vernon had left Rome for Naples with Edward Pratt,3 but he had returned by 29 April.4 On 3 July 1780 Vernon arrived in Venice with a Mr Cort.5 In June his mother, Lady Harriott Vernon, had sent to John Strange, the British resident at Venice, a letter of credit for her son,6 who was presumably also the Vernon presented at court at Turin on 15 October.7 His second visit to Italy was made to deal with the burial of his sister Anna, Lady Berwick, who had died in Manfredonia in March 1797. He spent several weeks in Rome,8 and with his brother-in-law, Thomas, 2nd Baron Berwick, he was corresponding with Sir William Hamilton in Naples between April and September 1797 concerning the burial of the corpse in the convent of the Cappuccini in Manfredonia.9 He was returning home through Germany by December.8


A Mr and Mrs Vernon were listed at Bagni S.Giuliano on 4 July 1781.1 A Mrs Vernon died at Naples early in 1782. In March William Hamilton was enquiring as to the manner of her death; her body was exhumed and returned to England in 1785.2
Vierpyl spent some nine years in Italy where he was much patronised as a copyist by British and, particularly, Irish travellers. Throughout his stay he occupied rooms in the Palazzo Zuccari in Rome: at Easter 1748 with Matthew Brettingham; in 1749 they were joined by Patch and Joseph Wilton; in 1750 Vierpyl was again sharing with Wilton; in 1752 with Joshua Reynolds and Francis Harwood, and in 1753-5 again with Patch.1 His popularity within this artist community is suggested by his presence in the Parody of the School of Athens which Reynolds painted in Rome in 1751 (NGI). Vierpyl's first Italian commission came in the summer of 1749, apparently from Florence. On 1 September the young Lord Malton, who had just arrived there, told his father, Lord Rockingham, that he had commissioned marble copies of the Apollo and Clapping Faun from the Uffizi; these were made by Vierpyl and are dated 1751 (Wentworth Woodhouse).2 Marble copies of the same pieces 'the same siese as the Original[s], of the best Carara marble', together with two marble tables and six gesso busts, were commissioned by Ralph Howard (later Lord Wicklow), who paid Vierpyl a first instalment on 15 February 1752.3 James Russel acted as Howard's agent in Rome and his letters described Vierpyl's progress. On 18 March 'Mr Virpyle, by working very hard, has reduc'd his block, into something of a human shape'; on 20 September 'Vierpyle has finish'd your marble tables, & the statue of the Faun is far advanc'd, & will turn out to appearance exceeding well both in respect of the Marble & the workmanship; he tells me that he has been very fortunate in the piece of marble destin'd for your other Statue'. On 25 October Howard heard from the Abbé Wilkins in Rome that 'Mr Vierpyl has finish't ye two tables & ye 6 Statues made of Plaister, ye Faun, & ye Apollo are both very much forward, & I believe that about Christmas they whill be finish't ... the marble of ye said two statues is very fine not being ye least spot in ye world in them & I believe ye workmanship wont be disagreeable'.4 But the works were not finished until October 1753. On 20 July 1753 James Tyrrell wrote to Howard from Florence that 'Verpyle [whom he had earlier, on 15 April, called 'a very honest young fellow'] is now here for a few days; he tells me that your Apollo is quite finished; he says also that your Fawn will be ready about the middle of September'.4 Finally Russel wrote on 25 December 1753 confirming their dispatch, adding that 'your statues have been extremely admired and prais'd by Gentlemen & Connoisseurs, from whence no small advantage has accru'd to Mr Vierpyle, [who has] since had commissions to do the fighting & the dying Gladiator, the former for Lord Charlemont, and the latter for Lord Pembroke, as likewise several busts for Lord Bolingbroke & other Gentlemen'.  Henceforth Vierpyl's activities were largely confined to making copies from the Capitoline Museum and the French Academy in Rome. On 17 February 1753 Cardinal Albani, whose influence in gaining access to such collections was enormous, was looking forward to meeting Vierpyl.5 Casts of both the Fighting Gladiator [the Borghese Gladiator] and the Dying Gladiator [Capitoline Museum] were in the French Academy, and in October 1754 Albani was helping Vierpyl (with what success is not recorded) to obtain a gesso 'of a statue' there which he wanted to copy for a commission.6 Lord Charlemont had given Vierpyl several commissions. On 26 July 1755 his agent John Parker reported that Vierpyl had yet to do the 'busts of Brutus, Pompey, and Caesar in bronze, that he was to do, the busts too in red marble', but the Gladiator, for which he had been paid on account, was 'very forward'.7 On 24 December Parker wrote that Vierpyl was to go in about fifteen days to Carrara with gessos of 'the little Apollo and the Mercury in the Farnese Gallery'; he had received a further payment (225-6). Vierpyl wrote to Parker from Carrara in May 1756 saying the two statues were 'almost in a state of being forwarded to Dublin' and he had sent twelve blocks of marble to await his arrival there (22 May 1756; 227).  But Vierpyl's largest commission, which apparently occupied him in Rome from 1751 to 1755, had come from Edward Murphy, Charlemont's tutor. It was for terracotta copies of 22 statues and 78 busts of Roman Emperors and other figures in the Capitoline Museum. These were all sent to Ireland in 1755. Vierpyl later described his work to Murphy in a letter of 15 August 1774; 'your happy, and, I believe, singular thought (of getting the whole series copied, and then by one artist only) has never before, nor to this day been executed by any sculptor, except me. So that your imperial series is the only one of the kind now in the world', and he went on to say that 'an equal series will never again be made; for ... I am certain that no eminent artist will hereafter stand four years, winter and summer (as I have done) in the chilling Capitoline museum to model so many busts and statues with his own hand' (323). Murphy bequeathed the remarkable set to Lord Charlemont whose descendants presented them to the Irish Royal Academy in 1868. Of Vierpyl's other commissions, Stephen Beckingham had marble busts of Commodus, Marcus Aurelius, Caracalla and Faustina,8 and a Mr Greenhill, who had shared rooms with Beckingham at Rome in 1753, was to have had three plaster busts of the Farnese Homer.9 By December 1754 he had a commission from the 10th Earl of Huntingdon for a bust of Pythagoras (24 Dec. 1755; 223), and 'some work' for Lord Huntingdon was mentioned the following May (22 May 1756; 228). On four occasions between 1751 and 1756 Vierpyl sent works of art back to England from Rome: on 28 January 1751 'una tavola intagliata di marmo bianco e due sgabelloni pure di marmo'; on 15 September 1752 six pictures ('uno moderno'); on 12 March 1753 'un cinerario antico di marmo, un busot di gesso e due peducci' and on 1 July 1756 'un frontale di una cassa di bassorilievo figurante una caccia; 3 cassete di marmo bianco; 6 busti di marmo'.10 These lists suggest Vierpyl was acting as an agent for collectors of antiquities. It is known he helped Lyde Brown (who presumably came to Rome on his first visit to Italy in 1753), and in December 1755 Patch had entrusted to him the Claude Apollo and Admetus (now SNG) which he had obtained for Sir William Lowther from the Muti collection.11  Vierpyl left Rome in 1756.12 Parker told Charlemont that Vierpyl was 'hastening his departure, which will be before March [1756] (222). On 4 October 'Vierper di Giovanni' left Venice.13 On his return to Ireland Vierpyl settled in Dublin, where he undertook further commissions for Lord Charlemont.

Villettes was with the British embassy at Turin from 1732. In August 1734 he was appointed secretary and he acted as chargé d'affaires during the frequent absences of the ambassador, the Earl of Essex.1 In 1741 he was made British resident, a position he held for eight years. In October 1747 Augustus Hervey was sent out to rebuke him for the tone of his letters to Admiral John Byng, which were considered to be 'dictating and finding fault, as if the Commander in Chief in those seas [the Mediterranean] had been immediately to act under his orders and directions, and so make the King of Sardinia imagine they were so'. But Hervey found Villettes to be 'very sensible and very artful', and the affair was quickly buried.2 Villettes left Turin on 25 July 1749 to take up his appointment as British minister at Berne.


Lord Villiers, 'the Prince of Maccaronis', made his grand tour with his tutor, William Whitehead (the future poet laureate), and Lord Nuneham. Villiers's travel diary (Villiers jnl. MSS) provides a full itinerary.1 In Rome between December 1755 and April 1756 he sat to Dance for the portrait now at Middleton Park.

Following his marriage on 5 January 1791, Villiers took his wife to Italy and her journal describes some of their stay in Rome from April to June 1791.1 On 18 April they were dining in Rome in a party including Gerald Wellesley, Richard Colt Hoare and Lord Clifford, who was to recommend Robert Fagan as a portrait painter.2 On 19 June Mrs Villiers began to sit to him. They were presumably the 'Milord Williers e Sua Moglie' in Venice on 15 July 17913 and they were in Geneva on the 27th and Paris on 12 September. They returned to Italy to pass the winter at the Corcelli Hotel in Naples, later recommending it to Sir William Forbes (who stayed there from December 1792 and remarked that the Villierses had stayed there the previous winter).4
Thomas Villiers was in Venice in May 1733 with Lady Essex, whose step-daughter he was later to marry.1 'Mr Villiers, Brother to the Earl of Jersey, whose relations are extremely desirous he should return to England' took a letter dated 24 March 1734 from Lord Essex in Turin to Henry Pelham in London, in which Essex remarked on Villiers' 'abundant Stock of Good Nature'.2 He was again in Rome in 1773, as Lord Hyde.3
Early in February 1702 Lord Villiers was reported to be in Florence with his governor,1 but by the 7th he was in Rome where he met the Duke of Shrewsbury on three occasions, the last in July that year.2 At Easter 1702 he was living on the Strada Gregoriana in the house of Augusta Rosa.3 'Gui: Villiers' was at Padua on 7 April 17034 and, according to Lambert Blackwell, he left Florence on 11 May 1703 for Venice 'designing for England'.5 At Florence in 1703 Soldani cast a medallion portrait of Villiers (BM).
Vincent was in Florence with his wife in July 1788.1 In 1790 he was appointed British resident in Venice; he arrived on 1 May, but died at Vicenza on 17 August 1791,2 and was buried in the Protestant cemetery.3





A Scottish non-juring minister, Waddell was four times in Padua (his visit in 1725 was described as his third). In 1712 he delivered a letter from Burrell Massingberd to William Kent in Rome (Kent letters MSS, 25 Jun. 1712).

In August 1799 Wade described himself to Emma Hamilton as succeeding with his 'authority as Governour' at Naples; in two semi-literate letters he mentioned that his 'finances is become very low' and his family had increased; by September his situation was becoming 'every day more disagreeable' (Morrison, 2:62, 68, nos.419, 426: 10 Aug., 14 Sep. 1799).

By 1738 Wagstaffe had been in Rome long enough to complete 'a more particular Acct. of ye Greek MSS. of St Paul's Epistles in ye Vatican Library and that of Cardinal Barberini yn had been ever before communicated to the world'.1 He became Anglican chaplain to the Pretender and his eldest son (who had written to his father in September 1745 referring to Wagstaffe's opinions and advice).2 In 1752 Andrew Lumisden called Wagstaffe his 'spiritual guide' and 'a great antiquary'.3 He was probably the 'Mr. W.' mentioned in James Russel's letters between 1748 and 1753.4 In January 1759 he performed the burial office at the funeral of Jonathan Skelton.5 Wagstaffe is recorded as living by the Piazza di Spagna in 1760-1, 1763 and 1770.6 He died at Rome on 3 December 1770, a much respected figure, and a sale of his works of art and books took place the following year.7
Mr and Mrs Walcot and a Miss Atkins arrived in Venice on 29 October 1792,1 and were noticed in Naples the following winter (the name written as 'Wallcot').2
Walcott and 'Willaume'[?] were travelling from Naples to Rome on 28 December 1763;1 'Walcot' had passed through Capua on the 27th.2 A Captain Walcott was in Florence, where he was the subject of a caricature etching by Thomas Patch who also included him in his Artist's Studio (WSL).
Lord Waldegrave, a Catholic, was in Florence in February 1705, when he attended the farewell dinner given for Lambert Blackwell.1 He was in Venice in January 17062 and on 2 February he was at Padua.3 He became a Protestant in 1719.





Walker's boundless energy and curiosity were amply demonstrated in his six-week tour of Italy. He visited all the principal cities (less Naples and Genoa), and described his journey in his Ideas suggested on the Spot in a Late Excursion through Flanders, Germany, France, and Italy [1790]. Having no Italian he conversed throughout his tour in Latin. In Venice he claimed to have visited twenty churches in a morning, and his commentaries ranged over Palladian architecture, peasant costume, farm implements, geology and opera. Although he admitted lacking the taste to appreciate the fine arts, he made a number of observations: St Peter's, for example, was 'a piece of gingerbread work' when compared with the Baths of Diocletian or the Pantheon. Not surprisingly on such a hectic itinerary, he commented in Rome that he 'began to grow sick of palaces, pictures, and statues - the numbers of the last we have seen in some hundreds of these beautiful churches makes one indifferent to all degrees of excellence'. But he was particularly moved by Leonardo's manuscripts in the Ambrosian Library at Milan: 'a prodigious folio, with mathematical, mechanical, and optical sketches', which he did not have sufficient time to study, but enough to 'trace much genius, invention, and embrio conceptions, that might have rose to something of consequence': he also noticed that the few subjects from natural history were 'in bad order'. Walker had travelled with his son and an unnamed friend; his book is much given to 'idle narrative', but the author pleads for indulgence, assuring his critics that it was not worth their while 'to discharge Artillery upon such a Fly'.
While Procurator at Rome between 1757 and 1777,1 Walker sometimes acted as governor to young Catholic travellers (see John Courtenay Throckmorton and Henry Tichborne).

His name is variously written as 'Walter', 'Wager', 'Walker' and 'Il Maggior Walher Ufficiale'; he was travelling with his wife.1 Cornelia Knight wrote that in April 1796 Major Walker had left Rome to return to England.2


Three Jacobites, Walkinshaw, Wemyss and Mackenzie, were sent away from Venice by the British resident, Elizeus Burges, who said they had moved on to Padua and were going to France (SP 99/62, f.397; Burges, 1 Dec. 1719).
Following his intemperate conduct as governor of Goree (where he had a British sergeant killed through flogging), an action was brought against him in England. Wall escaped abroad and lived principally in France, but Farington recorded that 'the late Governor Wall' was blackballed from Prince Augustus's English Club at Naples (i.e. c.1796).1 Wall returned to England in 1797, gave himself up for trial in 1802, and was executed.
In May 1796 Mrs Wall had taken a country house, Cuercia, outside Florence; Betsey Wynne did not like her face (Wynne Diaries, 2: 88, 90; 10, 25 May 1796).

For the first two winters after his election to Parliament Wallace's precarious health led him to resort to a southern climate.1 He was presumably the Wallace seen in Rome late in 1790 by Lord Mornington, who said he seemed 'a very sensible man, and very likely to come forward; he is a very good friend and ought to be cultivated'.2
He left the English navy in 1750 to become capitano di Vascello at Leghorn in the Tuscan service with the rank of Tenente Colonello. A Catholic convert, he was elected to the Accademia Etrusca (Gazz.Tosc.; Leghorn, 5 Dec. 1781).
The 'Waller' in Venice on 8 December 1791,1 was presumably Sir Robert Waller in Rome the following January.2

Wallis spent the greater part of his life in Italy and Germany, achieving a considerable European reputation as a landscape painter, while remaining less familiar in Britain (for example, Redgrave called him John William Wallis).1 He first went to Italy in 1788 as the protégé of Lord Warwick, who paid for him to continue his studies in Rome. In 1789 he was in Naples, where he was to be patronised by Sir William Hamilton. He was probably the artist 'Wallace' in Rome in November 1790.2 He travelled extensively in central and southern Italy, his landscapes indicating that he had been to Salerno in 1789, Paestum in 1790, and Tivoli in 1790 and 1791.  In 1792 he accompanied Thomas Hope to Sicily, where he made a series of elaborate drawings (examples at the Huntington, San Marino; Ashmolean and Dresden). Early in 1793 he was working in Naples on two large landscapes for Sir Corbet Corbet, which three English travellers saw in his studio. Robert Parker described one as having 'a most beautiful oak at Caserta'; Sir William Forbes said they were morning and evening scenes,3 and when Charles Blagden visited Wallis ('a young man with keen black eyes') he saw a very large picture of the 'Isola di Sora in the Garigliano' (the 'colouring dark blues, hard, unnatural') and a companion piece of an evening scene which included the ruins of Paestum, both being painted for Corbet.4 In September 1793 Wallis was invited by Lord Berwick to visit Egypt, but the expedition had fallen through by November.  Wallis's reputation was then becoming established in Italy. In November 1793 Thomas Brand described him as 'a promising young landscape painter', bidding fair 'to be the best of the English branch since the death of poor Moore [Jacob More]'.5 He exhibited two landscapes at the RA in 1794, views of Abruzzo and Paestum, sent from an address in Naples, but Wallis had by then settled in Rome with his wife, Maria Boyick, and five-year-old daughter, Emilie, at Via Capo le Case. In April 1794 Sir William Hamilton was trying to recover from Lord Warwick a sum advanced to Wallis by his order.6 The same month Wallis signed the letter of thanks to Prince Augustus from British artists in Rome (Rome List 1794). In 1795 'Giorgio Waglas' was living on the 'Scesa di S. Giuseppe' in the parish of S.Andrea delle Fratte with his wife 'Madama Maria Wai' whose age was given as thirty. In April and November he made some excursions into the Campagna with Joseph Gandy, and again in October 1796.7 In November and December 1796 he was again at Naples with William Young Ottley (and a 'bambina Wallis').8  Wallis consorted increasingly with continental artists who included J.A. Koch, J.C. Reinhart, A.J. Carstens and Thorvaldsen (who owned several of Wallis's drawings, now in the Thorvaldsen Museum); Gottlieb Schick, who became his son-in-law, was lodging with him from 1804. Probably influenced by such company, Wallis turned to literary subjects; in 1801 he completed two scenes from Ossian,9 which were bought by the 4th Earl of Bristol. Guy Head and William Ottley also bought his works and at the Ottley sale in 1814 (Philips, 6 Jun.) Wallis was described as uniting the 'the wildness of Salvator Rosa with the classic chastity of Nicolo Poussin, and the elegant simplicity of his kinsman, Gaspar'. Meanwhile Wallis had made himself unpopular with his fellow artists during the French invasion, as Farington later recounted.10 He had proclaimed republican views (which had offended Reinagle) and had behaved 'in an infamous manner, having acted as a Spy upon them'. Farington further recounted that Wallis 'had married an English woman who attended him to Rome, where his ill behaviour to Her, it was believed, caused Her to lose her senses. He availed himself of the Code of Laws respecting Divorce at that time established by the French, & agreeable to it, took a Roman woman to wife'.  During those unsettled times Wallis achieved some success as a dealer. Between July and November 1799 he was negotiating the sale of a marble Faun belonging to Vincenzo Pacetti to 'Lord Beckford' [William Beckford of Fonthill?] in England.11 In November 1799 he had told Pacetti that he was soon returning to England, but if he did it was only briefly. When he eventually returned to England in 1806 he brought with him a collection of pictures, both his own and others he had acquired.12 He subsequently imported from Spain Velazquez's [Rokeby] Venus and Correggio's Madonna of the Basket. He returned to Italy in 1810-12 and settled there in 1818, dying in Florence in 1847.
He passed through Rome on 31 March 1722 on his way to Naples where he was to embark for Sicily (SP 85/14; Walton, 1 Apr. 1722).
After fighting as a volunteer at the battle of Oudenarde, Wallop spent a year in Geneva before travelling further in Italy and Germany (CP). He was in Padua on 28 December 1709 (Brown 1351).
Mr Walpole, Sr Robert's 2nd son' had arrived in Venice for the Carnival by 20 January 1730. On 12 March Elizeus Burges reported that he had been 'extremely ill' and had been 'in so bad a way that nobody expected he would recover', and as he was 'a very pretty young Gentleman, everybody was under ye greatest concern imaginable for him' but he was now abroad again. With Lord Boyne he then decided to attend the opera at Piacenza.1 On 11 July they were together in Padua,2 and on 18 July in Bologna.3 By 27 July they were in Rome, where they became 'entirely taken up with seeing the antiquities'; they paid a brief visit to Naples and left Rome for Florence on 26 August.4 On 29 September Burges reported that Walpole and Boyne were in Florence intending to come to Venice via Genoa, Turin and Milan. On 3 November he said they were in Padua 'after having seen all ye great Towns in Italy', but that a Mr Stuart who had been travelling with them had died at Padua, and Walpole was intending to set out in less than a fortnight for France. But Walpole did not leave Venice until 12 January 1731, setting out for Genoa with Colonel William Kennedy and Captain Jasper Clayton.5 On one of his visits to Venice he sat to Rosalba Carriera for a pastel portrait (Houghton).
On leaving Cambridge Horace Walpole, the Prime Minister's youngest son, set out for Italy with Thomas Gray, the future poet. Close friends at Eton and Cambridge, they were intellectually matched, but where the young Walpole was privileged and extrovert, Gray was shy and introspective. Sir Robert Walpole, who paid for and directed their travels, considered their own company sufficient and there was no travelling tutor. Their journey remains familiar through their letters.1  They had spent nearly nine months in France and Switzerland before reaching Italy in November 1739. They crossed Mont Cenis, 'such uncouth rocks, and such uncomely inhabitants!', and passed through Parma and Bologna to Florence. There on 16 December they were received by the acting British resident, Horace Mann, ten years older than Walpole and already the fastidious bachelor. Although they never saw each other again after April 1741, the understanding which now sprang up between them lasted till death, and the Walpole-Mann correspondence remains an unmatched source for the study of the grand tour.  Walpole otherwise at first found society in Florence dull and his response to churches and galleries was muted. 'The farther I travel the less I wonder at anything', he wrote precociously; 'the same weaknesses, the same passions, that in England plunge men into elections, drinking, whoring, exist here, and show themselves in the shape of Jesuits, cicisbeos, and Corydon ardebat Alexim's. The most remarkable thing I have observed since I came abroad is, that there are no people so obviously mad as the English' (24 Jan. 1740). But in January and February the Carnival was different 'good gods, how I have danced!', he wrote: 'I have done nothing but slip out of my domino into bed, and out of bed into my domino' (27 Feb.). He frequently met the Regent and his family, Prince and Princess de Craon and their son, Prince de Beauvau, and he was regularly received by Lady Pomfret and her two daughters, Lady Sophia and Lady Charlotte Fermor.  In March 1740 Walpole and Gray went on to Rome, passing through Siena ('tis old, and very smug, with very few inhabitants'; 22 Mar.). Pope Clement XII had died on 6 February and the Conclave was in session (but proved factious and did not end until 17 August). Walpole encountered a different society, in which Jacobite influence was strong and his own status less privileged. He informed Mann of Jacobite movements with more enthusiasm than tact, describing a hunting expedition by the Young Pretender as a potential foray into Spain. But antiquity equally claimed his attention. Both Gray and Walpole bought medals and bronzes, examined inscriptions and explored ruins in the Campagna. Walpole later wrote that he had made 'but small collections, and have only bought some bronzes and medals, a few busts, and two or three pictures' (2 Oct. 1740). He probably also commissioned at this time the statue for his mother's monument in Westminster Abbey from Filippo della Valle.2  Gray's patient scholarship was beginning to jar and Walpole became used to being surprised so that 'I don't perceive any flutter in myself when I meet with any novelties; curiosity and astonishment wear off'; but he commented on the 'ignorance and poverty' of Rome, where 'the palaces [are] so ill kept, that half the pictures are spoiled by damp' (16 Apr.). In June they spent some nine days at Naples and Walpole described the new excavations at Herculaneum (14 Jun.).  Early in July they left for Florence where they stayed in the resident's guest house, the Casa Ambrogi. Walpole completed his rhymed Epistle from Florence to Thomas Ashton, in which he condemned the Roman Church and the Stuart pretenders (as befitted the son of a whig prime minister), and enjoyed himself. 'I believe there never was a set of people so peaceable, and such strangers to scandal', he wrote; 'I am younger than ever, think of nothing but diverting myself, and live in a round of pleasures'.3 After six months he wrote that 'instead of being deep in the liberal arts, and being in the Gallery every morning ... we are in all the idleness and amusements of the town'; he confessed to being 'so lazy, and so tired of seeing sights' that he had not been to Leghorn, Pisa, Lucca or Pistoia (2 Oct.). In August, however, he crossed the Apennines, apparently for a brief visit to Bologna (29 Dec. 1741). He became the cicisbeo of Elisabetta Capponi, wife of the marchese Griffoni (whose memory was subsequently kept alive by the gift of her dog, Patapan, and of her portrait by Ferdinand Richter). Walpole had only to avoid, as much as he could, his sister-in-law, the unsatisfactory Lady Walpole (later Countess of Orford) then in Florence with Samuel Sturgis. There was no repetition of the Carnival in 1741 owing to the death in October 1740 of the Austrian Emperor (whose son-in-law was then Grand Duke of Tuscany) and amusement was reduced to cards and private concerts.  Walpole and Gray left Florence at the end of April 1741. They spent a few days at Bologna, and went on to Reggio, where the annual Fair brought out all Walpole's gaiety; 'here come all the nobility of Lombardy, and all the broken dialects of Genoa, Milan, Venice, Bologna, etc.' (10 May); he sat in the Duchess of Modena's box at the opera and attended balls and masquerades. For Gray this proved too much. There was a quarrel and Gray departed for Venice on his own (see Thomas Gray).  The disagreement probably centred round Walpole's affection for Lord Lincoln, whose arrival he was then impatiently awaiting. But when Lincoln and his tutor Joseph Spence arrived they discovered Walpole in bad health and quickly summoned Dr Cocchi from Florence. It was, however, Lincoln's presence which effected his cure. Walpole soon went on to Venice where he shared lodgings with Lord Lincoln, Francis Whited and John Chute (the effete 'Chutheds', as Walpole called them, friends of Horace Mann). They all sat to Rosalba Carriera (Walpole's portrait remains at Houghton). While Walpole and Lincoln continued to enjoy each other's company, Gray left Venice alone, apparently unable, or unwilling to cope with these new relationships. Two weeks after witnessing the coronation of the new Doge (Pietro Grimani) on 1 July, Walpole and Lincoln set out home, via Genoa. After two and a half years of European travel Horace Walpole reached Dover on 12 September 1741.
Horatio 'Pig Wiggin' Walpole (Horace Walpole's first cousin) set out from Geneva in October 1744 for Milan with his tutor Dr George Turnbull and with Richard Aldworth and Sir Thomas Sebright (see Aldworth). Walpole and Turnbull had spent 'some considerable time at the Academy' in Turin by April 1745,1 when Walpole's father proposed to the Duke of Newcastle that Turnbull might confer in Rome with the Abbé Rota, secretary of ciphers, to procure Jacobite intelligence.2 Their journey to Florence was then delayed through Turnbull's illness, but they had arrived there by 29 June 1745, and stayed several months. Walpole was enjoying the conversazioni at Horace Mann's in August though he did not 'produce himself much'; in December Turnbull was ill and Dr Cocchi thought there was 'a remote danger of a consumption'.3  In January 1746 Mann reported that Walpole had been very ill and had 'roared so much that we were all frightened', while Turnbull was also 'in a bad way, and I don't believe will recover', but they set out for Rome in April, Walpole fitter, but Turnbull 'in a very weak way and often out of order'. It may be assumed Turnbull was in no state to conduct clandestine business with the Abbé Rota. Walpole bought an 'antique gem of erudition' in Rome from Antonio Borioni, which was described by Ridolfino Venuti.3 Walpole's portrait by Subleyras (Temple Newsam) was said to have been painted in Naples, where the artist was staying between approximately November 1746 and June 1747.4 Walpole was back in London by June 1747. In 1749 James Russel asked that two copies of his Letters should be sent to young Mr Walpole, 'upon account of great favours, and kindness I received from him when at Florence'.5
R. Walpole' and 'H. Thomas' were together in Padua on 11 October 1722,1 and it was presumably at that time that Walpole sat to Rosalba Carriera for his pastel portrait (Houghton). He had arrived in Rome by 12 January 1723; he left for Naples on the 26th and returned on 6 February.2 Rawlinson, however, recorded Walpole, Captain Thomas 'of New College', and Edward Finch returning from Naples to Rome on 4 February, Walpole and Thomas staying at 'Monaco's palazzetto'.3





Walter went to Italy with his wife and daughter Harriet (c.1754-86, later Lady Grimston) to acquire works of art for his new house at Dorking.1 They were probably in Florence from September to November 1769 (a Mr 'Ugualter' / 'Valter' was listed there on 30 September and 11 November),2 when they were expected at Naples.3 There his daughter sat to Glain for a pastel portrait dated 1769 (Gorhambury) and they were still in Naples in May 1770, when Patrick Brydone enjoyed a 'hearty dinner with many of our friends at Mr Walter's, ... drinking plentifully of his excellent burgundy'.4 They were next in Rome, where Matthew Nulty acted as their cicerone and agent. Since Walter subsequently gave Nulty £180 'for his kindness to us while at Rome and on our journey to Paris 1771',1 the partnership was evidently successful.  Walter's acquisitions included a cinerary urn (called the tomb of Menelaus), some bronzes and three ancient vases (of which two were bought from Piranesi), and he bought two chimneypieces from Piranesi for Bury Hill.5 Piranesi later dedicated seven plates to Walter and his wife in his Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi [1778], one of the dedications paying particular tribute to Walter's taste. Less expected were gifts of works of art from the Pope; after granting them an audience, Clement XIV gave young Harriet an Elsheimer Mercury and Battus and her father his bust by Hewetson (Gorhambury).1 On 10 June 1771 Nulty submitted an account for paintings by Veronese (a Venus and Adonis) and Salvator Rosa (Theseus and Aethra), with three Gaspard Dughets, a small Claude and a cameo ring.1  The Walters left Rome in April 1771, going to Loreto and Bologna, where Lord Fortrose (who then aspired to the hand of young Harriet, see Lord Fortrose, 1744-81) was to meet them, before arriving in Venice for Ascension.6 At Venice, James Byres reported in May, the Walters were 'obliged to stay until a Mr North has cured all their servants who are now laid up not with the effects of devotion during their winter quarters in [Rome]'.7  Among the pictures listed at Gorhambury c.1800 were 'Fabrice. Two Neapolitan Friars' [probably Pietro Fabris] and 'Dean. A large landscape after Claude Loraine' [doubtless Hugh Primrose Dean],8 both possibly acquired during the tour in Italy.

Mrs[?] Walter' was in Rome on 4 February 1738; 'Walter' arrived in Naples with a Mr Herbert on 23 February, and was in Rome on 11 March, with a Captain Born, always moving in Jacobite circles (Sinclair jnl.MSS).

Ward, 'his classics in one pocket and quoting his authors', had been at The Hague with Lord Charlemont before coming to Italy, where they were again together.1 Ward was in Rome by March 1751, preparing to play the part of Virtue on the Triumphal Car devised by Charlemont for the Carnival (see Charlemont), and he appears in two of the caricature groups (NGI) painted by Reynolds (with Sir Thomas Kennedy, Lord Charlemont, Phelps, Lord Bruce, Joseph Leeson and Joseph Henry), as well as in a caricature drawn by P.L. Ghezzi, again with Kennedy (Sotheby's, 23 Mar. 1972). At Easter 1752 Ward was listed living in the Piazza di Spagna,2 and in May that year he subscribed to Charlemont's Academy for British artists in Rome (see John Parker).3 By then he was in Naples, having passed through Capua on 30 April4 and in June he was describing to Charlemont in Rome the progress of the excavations at Herculaneum.5 In August he was reported to have left Dresden for Berlin.6 Pancrazi dedicated a plate in his Antichita Siciliane [1751-2] to 'Giovanni Ward'.



Having, according to Horace Walpole, 'a miserable constitution', Lord Warkworth was sent abroad with a tutor Jonathan Lipyeatt in August 1761. Sir James Gray reported his arrival at Naples 'in perfect health' on the Kennington with Baron Stosch [Heinrich Muzell (1723-82), called Baron Stosch from 1757].1 Warkworth found 'a vast many English' there,2 among them James Adam who condescendingly described him as 'a fine obliging boy: we play frequently at chess'.3 Three months later Warkworth was still in Naples, and on 24 January 1762 he sailed to Constantinople with Henry Grenville.4 Horace Mann later said that the 'two Lords Piercy' [the other being Lord Algernon Percy] had recovered their health by sailing about the Mediterranean.5  In May 1762 Warkworth was about to return to Italy overland (with a Mr Porter), intending to pass the following winter at Naples,6 but in September he was in Florence, resolved to pass the winter there with Thomas Dundas and Lord Fordwich (later 3rd Earl Cowper).7 In November he visited Pisa.8 By March 1763 he was in Rome,9 where he sat twice for his portrait: to Nathaniel Dance before the Colosseum with Lipyeatt (priv. coll.) and to Batoni (Alnwick; Clark/Bowron 261). He also commissioned two landscapes from Solomon Delane which James Martin saw at Rome the following year.10 On 16 April Warkworth was expected at Venice with Dundas and he had arrived by the 30th.11 At the end of May both Warkworth and Dundas accompanied Lord Northampton at his offical entry as British ambassador into Venice. On 22 July James Martin bought Lord Warkworth's chaise in Paris.12
Warner made the grand tour with Hamon Lestrange, a Norfolk neighbour, and sent regular reports on his progress to his uncle Sir James Howe. Lestrange kept a factual diary until December 1714, which showed less interest in the fine arts than in local industries and agriculture.1 They had spent a year in France before arriving on 5 October 1714 at Leghorn where they found so many English merchants that 'above half the Town understand us'. They had an introduction from Sir Henry Bedingfield to the Grand Duke in Florence and, said Warner, they were able to see the 'the best Pictures and Medalls I ever saw'. Six months were spent in Rome, where they watched Carnival and saw 'every day some new curiosity either in Antiquity or Statuary or Painting'. On the return journey, consul Broughton reported on 31 May that they were in Venice for Ascension and intended to leave shortly.2 They were at Padua on 2 June 1715,3 and met Thomas Coke at Geneva, but soon afterwards Lestrange died of small pox at Basel. Warner himself was ill, and did not reach home until April 1716. In Italy Warner had been unable to avoid buying 'some Pictures and Prints which are the chief Manufactures of that Country'.
The witty and scholarly Dr Warner was at least twice in Italy. On 13 August 1778 he arrived in Venice ('Gugliemo Worner' with 'Giovanni Didem')1 on confidential business associated with his friend George Selwyn's claim to be the father of the marchesa Fagnani's daughter (see Selwyn); he was in Paris by November.2  He returned to Italy eight years later. In February 1786 Richard Colt Hoare (who later presented him with the living of Stourton) travelled with him from Naples to Rome; Hoare described how at the village of San Felice Circeo (near Naples), while he was making a sketch, Warner borrowed a book from a priest and read aloud a history of the town to a crowd of villagers who 'appeared to regard him as a being of a superior order come to enlighten them'.3 Henry Quin saw Warner and Hoare in Rome sometime before 1 April 1786.4
In November 1754 Warner came fourth in the third class of painting in the concorso of the Accademia di San Luca. He continued his studies at the Accademia del Nudo, where he was listed as 'Tomaso Uerner, Irlandese'.1 He was presumably the Warner who was 'beaten' by Patch in 1755 while both attended Lord Charlemont's academy in Rome2 (see John Parker). Warner left Rome in September 1757.3
Sir George, 'a good hearty Englishman', and his Lady, who was considered 'proud & consequential',1 made a brief tour of Italy which began at Turin in October 1783. They were presented at Court on the 26th with the Asshetons and Thomas Pitt (c.1758-after 1809),2 and by the end of the month they were at Genoa.3 They passed through Florence late in November and by 21 December they had reached Rome, where Lady Warren introduced Mary Berry to Cardinal de Bernis.4 Dr Parkinson (whose tour largely coincided with their own) noted that her scent upset the Roman ladies, and then at Naples she was boasting of her acquaintance with the Prince of Wales.4 On 30 January the Warrens visited Pompeii with the Berrys and on 7 February they went together to Caserta. The Warrens were back in Rome by 12 April when they attended a dinner given by the Venetian ambassador.5 On 21 April they dined in Rome with Lady Elizabeth Foster, the Berrys, Jonas Brooke and Parkinson and many of them joined a party to Tivoli three days later. On 13 May they were in Bologna and five days later in Venice; on 5 June they were in Milan, staying at the Auberge Imperiale.


Warrington, with Valline and Adams, signed a memorial to Sir William Hamilton in June 1786.1 He owned a villa near Vesuvius, where Captain Robert Scott met him in June 1787 (describing him as Valline's business partner).2 In the winter of 1792/3 Robert Parker met a Mr and Mrs Warrington and their son in Naples.3



Appointed Procurator of the English Benedictines at Rome in 1777,1 he became a privileged member of the Young Pretender's household. He acted as confessor to his daughter, the Duchess of Albany, who on her death in 1789 left him her father's papers, an annuity of 100 scudi and made him her executor (an office he prudently declined).2 In 1778-9 Waters was also acting as governor to one Charles Greenwood in Rome, an unhappy association according to Father Thorpe. In December 1792 Patrick Moir took Sir William Forbes to see a number of Stuart portraits in Waters's house. His correspondence with Dom Augustine Walker, his predecessor at Rome (Waters letters MSS), shows Waters to have been familiar with artists and antiquarians, and particularly with James Byres who owned his portrait3 (probably that by H.D. Hamilton now at Montpellier).2 He was presumably the 'Abbé Walters' whom Thomas Jones met in Rome on 30 March 1780 and in Naples on 6 November 1782.4  In 1805 Waters passed the Stuart papers he had inherited to Richard Bartram, the British consul at Civitavecchia, Sir John Coxe Hippisley having been instrumental in negotiating their sale to the British government; he was granted an annuity of £200, but Waters died in Rome after receiving only the first quarterly instalment.5

Watkins was travelling with William Degge, Richard Liddell and George Knapton; they were seen together in Rome sometime between 1 May and 30 June 1732,1 and were all at Padua on 3 June.2
Thomas Watkins went to Italy with George Pocock, with whom he had been at Christ Church, and he described his tour in a series of letters to his father which were published in 1792 (Watkins, Letters). They passed two months in Switzerland before entering Italy in September 1787. Turin tired them ('which I can only attribute to the uniform appearance of the place'); they spent three weeks in Florence, staying at Megit's hotel (which Watkins warmly commended), and they reached Rome in November. Watkins disparaged those travellers who spent only three weeks in Rome '(as I should suppose) for no other purpose than to to tell their acquaintance in England they had seen St Peters' (2:90). They spent some six weeks there, reading Tasso, Ariosto and Metastasio with their language masters, and being entertained by Cardinal de Bernis, to whom they had a letter of introduction from Lord Lansdowne (formerly 2nd Earl of Shelburne).  In January 1788 they went on to Naples and then made an excursion to Sicily between February and April. Returning to Naples in April, they ascended Vesuvius by night, 'and never', wrote Watkins, 'did I behold anything so dreadfully sublime', the contrast between the mountain and the Bay of Naples in the morning sun seeming 'like the passage from the Tartarean to the Elysian fields'. In April they were back in Rome revisiting 'the most interesting ruins, paintings and sculpture', which included Du Quesnoy's Susanna, 'infinitely superior to the extravagant figures of Michael Angelo, or to the quaint productions of Bernini'(2:90-1). Thomas Jenkins presented them to the Pope, who received them affably in his dressing gown and talked in Italian about hunting until it began to appear that 'the gentlemen, who were most acquainted with the subject, were the least conversant in Italian', and the Pope 'politely shifted the conversation to the Villa Borghese' (2:92). Watkins and Pocock left Rome on 24 April for Venice which they reached in time for Ascension on 1 May. In June Pocock returned alone to England while Watkins stayed behind, having been invited by Niccolo Foscarini, the newly-appointed Venetian ambassador to Turkey, to travel with him to Constantinople.  After spending nine months in Turkey, Greece and Dalmatia, Watkins returned to Venice in March 1789 to witness the election of the Doge, Lodovico Manin. He left early in April, and his last letter is dated Brussels, July 1789.  Watkins loved Italy and enjoyed the society of Italians, whose character was often, he thought, 'grossly misrepresented by prejudice and ignorance'; 'if crimes be more prevalent here than in other countries', he wrote, 'they do not arise from the natural disposition of the inhabitants, but from bad government and superstition'. Their one serious shortcoming was marital infidelity and even there Watkins considered them less culpable 'than the British women, whose consorts are generally the objects of their own, not of their parents' choice'. He found the Italians 'infinitely more attentive to us than we to them, more temperate, less arrogant, and less prejudiced'.



He was possibly the 'Walson' / 'Waston' listed in Florence on 3 June and in Venice on 26 June 1775, see Crosbie 1775.
With his governor, George Waddell, he was in Padua on 31 October 1730.1 In November 1731 Stosch reported that 'Weston' and Waddell were in Florence and had openly consorted with Jacobites in Rome.2
The Mr Watson who called on James Martin at Venice on 14 December 1764,1 was probably the John Watson at Venice to whom James Boswell in 1765 and Laurence Sterne in 1766 requested their letters should be sent,2 and the John Watson in Venice in 1769 who supplied money to Sir Watkin Williams Wynn.3  He may also have been the John Watson acting British consul at Venice from 1791-3 (between the death of Sir Francis Vincent and the arrival of Richard Worsley), and nominally chargé d'affaires from May 1797, when Worsley left, to January 1808.4
In March 1749 Watson was at Florence in Horace Mann's house, recovering from 'the bad effects of a favour or two he received from a person here who had been generous to others', Madame Bocchineri.1 He was presumably the Mr Watson who gave hospitality at Lucca to Thomas Barrett in the summer of 1749.2 Early in December 1749 he arrived in Naples with his cousin, Lord Malton, Major James Forrester and Thomas Barrett3 (Thomas Pelham, later Earl of Chichester, arrived in Naples with John Milbanke at the same time; although it has been said that he was travelling with Watson4 this appears to be the only time their paths crossed until they were at Hanover together with Lord Malton in October 17505). In March 1750 Lord Malton wrote that his cousin had left him at Naples 'and will be in England the latter end of the summer'.6 In August 1749 Mann mentioned a marble copy by Prince Hoare of a Ganymede for Mr Watson, perhaps the same.7


Watson came to Italy seeking reparations from the Pretender after losing everything in the 1715 rebellion in Scotland; having gained nothing, he consulted Stosch as to whether he could safely return home after compromising himself in this way (SP 85/16; Walton, 8 Mar. 1728).
Mr Watson, Lord Rockingham's brother' was in Rome in December 1736 with his governor Dr George Turnbull; on the 27th they took Allan Ramsay and Alexander Cunyngham to see the Pamphilj Palace (Scots Charta Chest, 114).







William Watts of Chelsea, engraver, 'who is going to reside in Italy' sold his prints, books and music at Greenwood's on 6 July 1786.1 According to Redgrave he went to Naples.
He appears as a young man in Zoffany's Tribuna (Windsor) and was noticed in Florence by Lord Winchilsea on 2 January 1773 (Winchilsea letters MSS).

A successful circus rider, he was performing in Milan, Florence and Rome between April and August 1770; he was about to become a Catholic in August (Verri, Cart., 3:261, 278, 399, 407, 426, 444. Gazz.Tosc., 30 Jun.).

Webb was at Bologna by 24 June 1755,1 and on 9 November 1756 he wrote from Limerick describing to Lord Huntingdon how at Rome he had been unable to resist buying a number of paintings for £300, 'though I could ill afford it'. He listed 'two Albani's, a copy of Corregio by Carache, and a small piece by your favourite Parmegianino ... a capital piece by Julio Romano', and went on to suppose that they might all have fallen 'in the hands of a merciless privateer, the ornament of his doxy's cellar'.1 Webb also mentioned having 'sufficient materials' for a scheme which he had discussed at Rome with Huntingdon 'and have thrown some parts already into form'. This probably referred to Webb's Inquiry into the Beauties of Painting [1760]: at Rome Webb had met (and sat for a lost portrait to) Mengs who gave him a copy of his Thoughts on Beauty and Taste in Painting, and this, Winckelmann angrily maintained, was the source for Webb's treatise.2
In 1780 he had built a villa at Leghorn (which now belongs to the Provincia di Livorno; D. Pierotti in Inglesi a Livorno, 68).
On 31 October 1752 Nathaniel and Robert Webb were in Capua with John Cholwell,1 going to Naples; on 2 December 'Webb' and 'Chiolwell' were back in Capua on their way to Rome.1 On 16 January 1753 James Russel mentioned a Mr Webb in Rome.2 A Mr Webb was in Capua on 10 March 1753 with Robert Rochfort, Brinley Skinner and others.1
He was in Venice in December 1730 when Elizeus Burges described him as being 'So well known in many parts of Europe, for his particular way of Dieting and Governing himself in most other circumstances of life. He can't be less than sixty years old [but] uses as much exercise as a Running-Footman' (SP 99/63, f.147; 1 Dec. 1730).


A mighty agreable good sort of man', he attended concerts at Naples given by Lady Hamilton.1 Rheumatism prevented him from playing his violin himself, and in June 1780 Father Thorpe wrote that he was sorry not to have met Webb who was 'much afflicted with gout'.2 He was probably the Webb introduced at Court in Turin on 9 December 1781.3
Appointed head of the ornamental department at the Wedgwood factory in Etruria, Webber was sent to Rome in July 1787 to make models and drawings from works of art in the Capitoline Museum. Josiah Wedgwood, who sent his own son John Wedgwood with him, was counting on some supervision from Flaxman in Rome.1 Their projected route is cited in the itinerary above.  Josiah Wedgwood had hoped that his son would join the factory at Etruria, but from Rome John told his father he did not wish to join the pottery as he would thereby lose the advantages of his education, thus confirming his father's belief that a liberal education ruined a boy for business.1 Webber was still in Rome in November 1788, and John Wedgwood's baggage was about to be sent off from Rome on 24 December.2 They returned together through Switzerland, reaching England in 1789 (DBS).


The Websters were an ill-matched pair. Sir Godfrey had married at the age of thirty-eight a bride of fifteen; he was headstrong and profligate (known as 'Sir Wedfrey Gobster'), while she was already intelligent and ambitious. They had set out for the Continent in the spring of 1791 with their two infant sons, and their travels are recorded in Lady Webster's rather erudite journal1 (whose occasional asides confirm that her marriage was not an easy one). They spent some time in Paris and in Switzerland before arriving in Turin on 11 May 1792. Lady Webster at once applied herself to chemical lectures at Bonvoisin's, and they met Lady Duncannon, the Duchess of Devonshire and Lady Malmesbury. After a month they went to Milan, Lady Webster paying a visit to Spallanzani, director of the musum at Pavia. There followed a visit to Dresden and Vienna, but they were back in Venice in September,2 whence they proceeded to Naples. There on 10 February 1793 their son Henry was born.  There was much society in Naples, Lady Webster particularly liking the Palmerstons and Lady Plymouth, and she befriended Italinski, the Russian secretary. In March she joined an expedition to Paestum with the Palmerstons; she found the temples unattractive, 'the Doric, to my taste, is too uneven. The columns are squat and clumsy'. Her twenty-second birthday (25 March 'so old and yet so silly', she confessed) was spent at Pompeii. On 1 April she went to Benevento with Lady Plymouth, Thomas Pelham (later 2nd Earl of Chichester) and the younger Henry Swinburne; there were excursions to Pozzuoli and Baiae in May, and, with the Duchess of Devonshire, she dined with the King. It must have been at this time that she sat to Robert Fagan for the three-quarter length portrait with a view of Vesuvius in the background which Italinski owned (now priv. coll.). She left Naples on 23 May with regret: 'what can please or cheer one who has no hope of happiness in life', for whom 'home is the abyss of misery[?]'. The Websters went back to Rome through Capua, 'the antidote to all pleasure at present from its filth and dulness'. On 26 May Lady Webster began her course on Roman antiquities under 'old Morrison' [Colin Morison]; her notes fill several pages of her journal. They left Rome on 14 June 1793 for Florence, travelling slowly by vetturini through Perugia and Cortona. [Thomas?] Hodges went with them. They arrived on 20 June and in the evening Lady Webster went with Lady Elizabeth Foster, Lady Hervey and John, Lord Hervey, to the opera; the following day she was in the Uffizi with 'my friend [Thomas, c.1751-1814] Brand'. She met Prince Augustus and Felix Fontana, the Grand Duke's director of museums and she evidently enjoyed the company of the Countess of Albany and her companion, the poet Count Alfieri. On 2 July, having left the children with Dr John Stewart and an Italian physician, Gianetti, the Websters set off home. They were in England on 1 September.  They set sail again in December and on 8 January 1794 found the children well in Florence. John, Lord Hervey, attended Lady Webster, finally making a passionate declaration to her on 14 February. 'Oh! what vile animals men are, with headstrong passions', she wrote. But she had already met Henry, 3rd Baron Holland, who had arrived in Florence on 29 January, and their growing relationship afforded her increasing solace. On 15 February the Websters left for Naples (spending just two days in Rome en route), where they spent 'six or seven weeks'. Lady Webster was then heavily pregnant and passed her time 'in lounging and talking'. Back in Rome they made an excursion to Tivoli with the Bessboroughs, the 2nd Earl Grandison 'and the young men'. She described her customary companions as being 'Lady Bessborough, Lord Holland, [the Rev. Matthew] Marsh, Brand etc.'. She described Pius VI giving his benediction 'to a kneeling and believing multitude. The sight was imposing. He is an excellent actor; Garrick could not have represented the part with more theatrical effect'.  Meanwhile her 'little friend' Mrs William Wyndham, wife of the new British envoy in Florence, had arrived and Lady Webster went there to meet her, and it was in Florence on 12 June 1794 that her daughter Harriet was born. She then set off on her own through Lucca and Pisa and visited Vallambrosa. She returned to Florence, while her husband went to Milan and Turin 'for some months' (he returned at Christmas); his portrait, dated 1796, i.e. after he had left Italy, was painted by Gauffier (untraced).3 Lady Webster met William Pitt Amherst and George Cornewall, went to balls and was very gay. On her father's death that winter, she inherited 'great wealth, upwards of ten thousand per annum. Detestable Gold! What a lure for a villain, and too dearly have I become the victim to him', she wrote. Her health suffered and she went to consult Dr Thompson in Rome in April 1795. Then in May her husband returned on his own to England, passing through Venice on 7-9 May.4  There followed a period of constant travel, mostly with Lord Holland. She took the children to the Lucca baths, where Mrs Wyndham joined her, with Lords Wycombe and Holland and [Thomas] Hodges. She visited Leghorn, lodging with John Udny, the consul. She went to Genoa in July with Hodges and Lord Holland, and returned to Florence late in August. In November she accompanied Mrs Wyndham to Bologna; she met the 4th Earl of Bristol, 'a clever, bad man', who asked for a copy of her portrait by Fagan. Her portrait had also been painted by Gauffier in 1795 (Christie's, 13 Dec. 1996) and Deare had been carving her bust in July that year in Rome.  The winter was spent in Florence, consorting with the Italian intelligentsia: Fontana, Fabroni (sub-director of the Grand Duke's museums), the mathematician Fossombroni, Delfico (a Sicilian lawyer), the Countess of Albany and Alfieri. In October 1795 she gave birth to a boy who died soon after; this was probably the 'petit enfant, fils de Mylady Webster' painted by Guy Head by December 1795.5 In February she went to Rome with Lord Holland; she again met Lady Plymouth and Amherst, and together they saw the great Antinous recently excavated by Gavin Hamilton. Sposini was restoring it, the sculptor who had undertaken the 'lasting monument of Ld. Bristol's bad taste' (Hercules and the Hydra). With Lady Plymouth and Amherst she spent two days at Tivoli. In March she went to Naples to see Italinski, who reluctantly sent Fagan's portrait of her to Lord Bristol, then ill in Naples; he set it on an easel, lit candles round it and failed to return it. With Lord Holland she returned to Rome and went straight on to Florence. On 11 April they left: 'I bid adieu to that lovely spot, where I enjoyed a degree of happiness for a whole year that was too exquisite to be permanent'. On 18 April she reached Ferrara where she saw the tomb of Ariosto ('the architecture of it is bad, and the bust but moderately executed'). Lord Holland rejoined her at Padua (where she had arrived on 20 April6); they left together on the 24th, going on to Trieste; they were in London in June.  Just before leaving Italy Lady Webster told her husband that little Harriet had died in Modena, but in fact the child was left with a nurse and smuggled back to England, the subterfuge preventing her husband from taking the child after the inevitable divorce action.7 In November 1796 she bore Lord Holland's child, and in July 1797, following her divorce, they were married. Her first husband took his own life in 1800.
Weddell set out for Italy with his friend and contemporary, the Rev. William Palgrave, as his Yorkshire house, Newby Hall, was being improved. There were designs for a new sculpture gallery,1 and in the course of his relatively brief stay in Rome Weddell rapidly acquired a collection of classical marbles which was to make it an outstanding museum.  They were at Geneva in October 17642 and, according to the Abbé Grant, their route to Rome lay through Turin, Milan, Genoa and Bologna.3 On 2 December they were in Florence, dining at Horace Mann's with Patch and James Martin,4 and on 23 December they arrived in Rome.5 They had an introduction from Mann to Cardinal Albani,6 but it was apparently the Abbé Grant who attended them. Palgrave wrote of the sights they had seen and the civilities they had observed: he had made his 'reverence to his Holyness, visited cardinals, bowed to princesses, [and] smiled at dutchesses'.5 Since Weddell and Palgrave were not much expert in French and had no Italian, 'the Society of the Inhabitants here did not give them much pleasure and therefor', the Abbé Grant told James Grant of Castle Grant, 'Mr Weddell chused to pass the greatest share of the evenings with your friend Signor Cassali'.7  But Weddell's visit to Rome was to have far more serious consequences. James Grant had given him letters of introduction to both Thomas Jenkins and Gavin Hamilton and, as Palgrave wrote, those letters 'were not in vain for Weddell is buying such a quantity of pictures, marbles etc as will astonish the West Riding of Yorkshire'.5 Thomas Robinson (later 2nd Baron Grantham), a kinsman of Weddell, had also provided him with an introduction to Jenkins.8 The Abbé Grant confirmed that Weddell had 'laid out a vast sum of money in purchasing pictures and statues. The person he dealt with most was Mr Jenkins'.7 Jenkins told James Grant that he had enjoyed a great share of Weddell's confidence 'in the choise of his Collection of Paintings and Sculpture; I flatter my Self when they are properly arranged at Newby that they will afford you pleasure',9 and on the same day Jenkins told Thomas Robinson 'your Relation Mr Weddell' had purchased 'the greatest part of the Paintings and Sculpture that I had'.8  Weddell's purchases are not well documented, but on 15 April he exported twelve cases of marbles and on 11 May 86 paintings,10 to be followed by Weddell's most celebrated purchase, the Barberini Venus (see Jenkins). 'My Venus is likewise Sold', Jenkins told Robinson, 'but I have orders not to say to whom'; he had experienced much difficulty in obtaining permission for export 'which would never have been obtained had it not been for the fortunate Circumstance of its being a Naked female'.8 Weddell acquired at least one piece, a marble tripod, from Piranesi; it remains at Newby and was engraved for the Vasi Candelabri, Cippi [1778]. Gavin Hamilton, meanwhile, had met Palgrave and Weddell by 9 January 176511 and Weddell commissioned from him two paintings illustrating Milton, the Penseroso and Allegro; they were engraved in 1768 but have since been lost.12 Weddell's patronage of British painters echoed that of James Grant and Thomas Robinson; he sat to Nathaniel Dance with Palgrave and his servant J'Anson (Upton House) and commissioned three portraits of himself-bust, three-quarters and whole-length-from Batoni (respectively; Newby, YCBA and Newby; Clark/Bowron 291-3), the last dated 1766, completed after Weddell had left Rome. On 9 March 1765 Palgrave and Weddell left Rome for a three-week visit to Naples,13 which Palgrave, at least, much enjoyed; 'what a climate, what air, what a situation, and what prospects!', but such delight was essential 'to compensate, as it does, for the trouble of getting at it'.5 They returned to Rome for Holy Week, and Sir William Farington met them there on 3 and 17 April.14 Early in May they set out for Venice,7 and they expected to be home in July.9  Back in England both joined Edward Gibbon's Roman Club15 and Thomas Robinson proposed Weddell as a member of the Society of Dilettanti. Weddell continued to have dealings with Jenkins, but the bulk of his collection had already been acquired. His celebrated sculpture gallery at Newby Hall was being built by 1767, the designs being completed by Robert Adam who also devised pedestals for the statues. Weddell's sculpture collection remains in situ, although his 86 paintings are no longer identifiable.



The elderly Chief Justice was travelling in Italy with his younger daughter Anne (c.1750-1810; d. unm.). His older daughter Mary had married the sculptor Nollekens. They were staying in Rome on the Strada Gregoriana at Easter 1777 (their ages given as sixty-five and twenty-seven).1 In November 1777 Thomas Jones and Nulty joined them on an expedition to Tivoli, during which their coach broke down. According to Jones the 'Old Justice, it seems, had been persuaded by his daughter, a Lady who piqued herself much on her classic learning and Virtu, to make the Tour of Italy - and they had been now, some months in Rome - where Miss held her Conversazioni, and had her levee of Priests, fryars, and hungry Abbates - till at last she turned Roman Catholic, & it was thought that her father was almost one himself at heart'.2 At Easter 1778 the parish census described Anne as 'gia fatta Cattolica'. In July 1778 Father Thorpe wrote from Rome that he supposed father and daughter would be back in England before the end of August.3
Having completed his education at St Omer and at the Jesuit University of Rheims, Weld set off on his grand tour in the summer of 1761. He was in France when his father died in December 1761, but his uncle encouraged him to go on to Italy; he returned to Lulworth in September 1762.1 In May 1763 Charles Wiseman remembered him having been at Rome with 'Mr Booth' (probably Fr. Charles Booth).2 At Rome he sat to Batoni for a half-length portrait, formerly at Lulworth (Christie's, 13 Dec. 1991). It was (it appears) his brother Thomas who was corresponding in 1786-7 with Father Thorpe concerning an altarpiece for Lulworth which was sent from Rome in March 1786.3



Mr and Mrs Welldon were at Rome between February and April 1785. They were Irish and she, 'a remarkable pleasing sensible woman,' was probably 'Ld Cuningham's daughter' [presumably 2nd Baron Conyngham of Mount Charles (d. 1787)]. William Blackett, who enjoyed their company, met them in Mantua in May and said they were taking a villa near Lausanne for the summer (Blackett letters MSS, 21 Feb., before 29 Mar., 12 Apr., 29 May 1785).



James Weemys' (also called 'Sir James Weemys' and 'Sr. J. W.') was at Rome between December 1737 and February 1738 mixing in Jacobite circles, and at Naples on 4 March (Sinclair jnl.MSS).

General Wemyss took part in the action against the French at Toulon in 1793 and was in Italy at the end of the year. Lady Webster met him with two other officers, Mathews and Featherstone, near Mantua in December,1 and 'Colonello Generale Wymys Inglese Officiale' arrived in Venice on 11 October 1794.2

Wendler' and 'Hunder' [Hunter] were listed at Capua on 4 February 1772, and 'Pietro Gio. Wendler' and his wife were in Capua on 9 June 1773 (ASN cra 1259).


As a senior army officer, Wentworth was sent on a special diplomatic mission to mediate between Austria and the Kingdom of Sardinia and to obtain information concerning the condition of the Austro-Sardinian forces in Italy. He arrived in Turin on 29 May 1747 and visited Genoa in June; in the autumn he attended military councils at Milan. He was thought to be partial to the Piedmontese, but died in Turin on 2 December before any settlement could be reached (Horn, 1:124. Wal. Corr., 19:406, 417, 451. R. Lodge, Studies in 18th century Diplomacy, 260-6).
Wentworth was in Italy with his tutor Aaron Hill, just after his kinsman, the diplomat Thomas, Lord Raby, had left.1 Raby advised him on his tour, warning him to take care of his health 'for Italy is a dangerous country and had like to make an end of me' (Dec. 1709), and recommending that he should take rooms in Rome with Charles Brown and be advised by Trench concerning pictures (25 Feb. 1710).2 Raby also assisted him financially in May 1710, through the bankers Williams & Smith in Venice.3  Wentworth was in Venice in December 1709,4 and in Padua on 19 March 1710.5 On 17 April 1710 he told Raby from Rome of the 'great many English' there,6 one of whom, the young English painter William Kent, Wentworth chose to sponsor for a period of seven years. Wentworth left Rome on 22 August and returned to England in the spring of 1712 after spending a year in Geneva and some time in Utrecht.7 Kent sent him 'a picture & drawings' from Rome on 17 April 1712,8 and was commissioned to undertake further work in 1714.9 But Wentworth appears to have been a lukewarm collector, having no money for the fine arts and, he told Raby, 'I shall be well content with the walls of Bretton just as they are so that I have but a good glass of Ale and Bear'.1  In 1719 Wentworth returned to Italy, travelling from Florence to Genoa with Kent in the autumn.10
A nephew of the Earl of Straffords' [Thomas Wentworth, see Thomas, Lord Raby], with a Miles Thornton and the 3rd Earl of Radnor, came to Florence from Rome in June 1726 (SP 98/25; Colman, 15 Jun. 1726).
An entry in the visitors' book at Padua University for 4 May 1705 reads 'Raby [i.e. Thomas Wentworth] the true not the counterfeit that it is at Venice'.1  By November 1729 there had been for 'some time' in Florence 'an Englishman who pretends to pass for a relation of My Lord Strafford's [as Raby had become], & as I hear,' wrote Francis Colman, 'goes by the name of Wentworth. He is a Roman Catholick, having abjured his Protestant religion some time ago when he was in France, where he says he had a pension offered him'; he was said to have used another name at Lyons and was found to be an impostor, possibly not English.2
In Italy Mrs Wescombe cast doubts on the loyalty of some of the Ministers in England; Brinley Skinner (British consul at Leghorn) went to see her in Rome and concluded she was either mad or had a special motive for making mischief (SP 98/33; Colman, 1 Apr. 1732. Lewis 1961, 104)
Benjamin West was the first American artist to visit Italy and he was allegedly an object of curiosity throughout his stay. Cardinal Albani assumed he must be a savage, and thirty carriages accompanied him on his first visit to the Belvedere, where he compared the Apollo with a young Mohawk warrior. But he was not the only American traveller in Italy and perhaps he subsequently exaggerated the impact of his arrival. West had set out from Philadelphia in 1760 'profoundly sensible ... that he could not hope to attain eminence in his profession, without inspecting the great master-pieces of art in Europe'.1 His journey was principally sponsored by William Allen, the Chief Justice of Pennsylvania, and his brother-in-law Governor James Hamilton, together known as 'the magistracy of Philadelphia'. West sailed with William's son John Allen and nephew Joseph Shippen in April 1760, and landed at Leghorn on 27 June. He was received by the merchants Jackson and Rutherfurd, who were familiar with American trade. Robert Rutherfurd was to be particularly protective of West and soon furnished him with letters of introduction to Cardinal Albani in Rome. While Allen and Shippen remained in Leghorn to sort out their mercantile affairs, West went straight to Rome, arriving on 10 July. Besides the near-blind Cardinal Albani, he met Thomas Robinson (later 2nd Baron Grantham) who immediately introduced him into society, including the Abbé Grant, Daniel Crespin and the antiquarian Joseph Wilcocks. West painted Robinson's portrait (untraced) which was much admired by Nathaniel Dance, while Thomas Jenkins thought it was by Mengs, who was also painting Robinson at that time. Mengs, who became (in his own words) West's favourite master, advised him to visit Florence, Bologna, Parma and Venice and then return to Rome 'and paint an historical compositon', the reception of which should determine his future course. Batoni, by contrast, received him loftily, allowing him to watch him paint as a suitable reward for having travelled three thousand miles.  A rheumatic fever was to hamper West throughout his stay in Italy. On 20 August 1760, on doctor's advice, he returned to Leghorn, where he was cared for by Rutherfurd, and by John Dick, the British consul. But he was soon able to return to Rome where he joined the classes held by Mengs at the Capitoline Academy, and resumed copying classical statuary and works by Michaelangelo and Raphael. In September Shippen and Allen told him that John Murray, the British resident at Venice, wanted West to provide him with a picture showing the costume of an American Indian, and West duly painted the Savage taking leave of his Family (Royal Coll. of Surgeons, London) in which the pose of the Indian is that of the Apollo Belvedere. He made his first copies for his American sponsors, of a Sibyl by Mengs and of Domenichino's Cumaean Sibyl (which he called St Cecilia; both now Ferens AG, Hull); the pictures had arrived at Philadelphia by May 1762. West had apparently painted two more portraits by 1761, of his compatriot and fellow traveller John Allen (priv. coll.) and of Captain Charles Medows (Thoresby Hall, Notts.) executed for John Dick. As his reputation grew, William Allen in Philadelphia approved further allowances: 'from all accounts he is likely to turn out a very extraordinary person in the painting Way', he wrote to his banker David Barclay in London on 19 August 1761; 'and it is a pity such a Genius should be cramped for want of a little Cash'.  By the summer of 1761 the rheumatic pains recurred and West had returned to Leghorn. He spent four months in Rutherfurd's house, before Rutherfurd arranged, through Horace Mann, to have him examined by Dr Nannoni at Florence. Four times the doctor operated on an abcess on his ankle, the last occasion in February 1762. On 11 May 1762 West wrote from Florence to Shippen (then back in Philadelphia) saying how he had already been 'near fore Months in a most deplorable Condition Lodged in a House over against the Palazzo Pitti without being able to stir out to see anything'. Horace Mann had been extremely attentive and had sent English travellers to him, amongst them the Duke of Grafton who had ordered a copy of the Madonna della sedia, which West subsequently had to decline. West slowly recuperated, a specially constructed table by his bed enabling him to draw. That summer he began three more copies for his Philadelphia patrons. The first was the Mengs Holy Family belonging to Lord Cowper, which he completed 'in about two months ... nothing but such a study after Mings could have made me go through with so large a copy, and in so short a time', he later told Shippen (London, 1 September 1763). He finished a second copy, of the so-called Annibale Carracci Venus lamenting Adonis from the Corsini Palace, and had laid in a third, of Titian's Venus of Urbino in the Uffizi, when a fire in the Uffizi (12 August 1762) put an end to his progress. The last two remain untraced today, but the Holy Family is in the Ferens AG, Hull. West then met the antiquary James[?] Matthews, until recently an executive in the firm of Jackson and Rutherfurd, with whom he determined to undertake the tour of northern Italy first suggested by Mengs. At the same time West received still further credit from Allen; 'we have such an extraordinary account of Mr West's Genius in the painting way', he wrote to Barclay on 10 October 1762, 'that we venturre to afford him these Supplies, and for his Incouragement to take it out in Copies'.  Thus, secure financially and with further letters of introduction from Rutherfurd, West and Matthews set off for Lombardy. At Bologna West copied by stealth Guido Reni's SS Peter and Paul in the Sampieri Palace,2 and at Parma Correggio's Holy Family with S Jerome, which he left unfinished as he proceeded to Mantua, Verona, Padua and Venice. There West painted two portraits. The first, of Lady Northampton and her infant daughter (Bass Museum of Art, Miami Beach)-the composition derived from Raphael's Madonna della sedia-'gained great applause', as Rutherfurd told Shippen, and the second was of John Murray, for whom West had already produced the Savage taking leave of his Family; the portrait is now untraced. He met Richard Dalton, George III's Librarian, who ordered him to paint a small composition for the King and further suggested they should meet in Rome and go together to England (an arrangement Dalton subsequently had to cancel). West returned to Florence and finished his copy of Titian's Venus in January 1763,3 before returning to Rome.  There he painted the Cimon and Iphigenia for George III and a pendant, Angelica and Medoro. These were the history pictures which Mengs had originally advised him to attempt on his return to Rome, and they earned him the reputation of being 'the American Raphael'; they were exhibited in London in 1764 but are now untraced. In 1763 he also copied Guido Reni's Herodias from the Corsini Palace (Ferens AG, Hull). He met and encouraged the young Angelica Kauffman, who had just arrived in Italy, and they drew each other's portraits (her drawing of West inscribed drawn in Rome ... 1763 is now in the NPG).  West's father then suggested that since the war between France and England was over, he should return home via England. West was initially uncertain, but Crespin encouraged him to accompany the Scottish dilettante William Patoun back to England and the two eventually set off in May 1763. They reached Florence on about 1 June and West then spent three days in Leghorn bidding farewell to his friends and supervising the packing and dispatch of his copies to Philadelphia. West and Patoun went on to Parma, where both completed copies of the Correggio St Jerome (untraced). West was elected to the Academy and, during an audience at Court, he kept his hat on, quaker-fashion, throughout the ceremony, to the dismay of the courtiers and the delight of the Duke. West had already been elected to the Academies at Florence and Bologna. West and Patoun then left Italy through Genoa and Turin; on 20 August they reached England where West was to remain for the rest of his life. According to his earliest biographer, John Galt, West was not impressed with Italy; he lamented the theocratical despotism and political tyranny; moral energy was subsiding; 'the country was covered with ruins, and the human character in ashes'. Only those places where trade was established-Turin, Genoa, Leghorn and Venice-preserved some community of feeling, and the little republic of Lucca provided 'a perfect exception to the general degeneracy of the country'.

West was in Florence in December 1710 with his governor, Anthony Marie de la Croce (a French huguenot naturalised in 1690), when he met John Bellings; they met again in Rome on 28 March and 16 July 1711.1 On 31 July Cole, the British chargé d'affaires in Venice, reported the arrival of 'Mr West, Son to My Lord de la Ware' from Rome,2 and West was again with Bellings in Venice on 21 September.1 West and 'Anthony de la Croze' had meanwhile visited Padua on 12 August.3
He was at Pisa at the same time as the Berry family and, according to Horace Walpole, he then fell in love with both Mary and Agnes Berry.1 He was presumably the West with whom Elizabeth Gibbes dined in Florence on 28 June 17902 and was possibly the 'Western' listed in Rome on 12 December 1791.3
A well-connected cousin of the Lyttelton and Grenville families, West was serving in the Mediterranean during the War of the Austrian Succession. By 13 November 1742 he had spent a week in Florence with Captains George Balchen (his brother-in-law) and Osbourne, receiving 'all possibly marks of attention from the Great Duke's ministers'. Horace Mann, who had anticipated being 'devoured by these sea monsters', found him to be of 'good sense, quiet and easy'.1 Later, in 1756, West was second-in-command to Admiral John Byng with the Mediterranean fleet.
West is mentioned by the Duke of Shrewsbury in Venice and Padua in the company of John Howe; West left Venice the day before Shrewsbury and Howe 'to provide' for them at Padua (Shrewsbury Jnl.)Dr West, 'an English clergyman' was reported at Venice in August 1717; 'he lives with two merchants, whose names, I take it, are Williams and Smith', wrote Dominic Sheldon, 'but he is extremely observed by all the Whigs there, and very shy of being seen to have any thing to do with those suspected to be in the King's [Pretender's] interest'.1 In November 1717 'West the non-juror' was accompanying three 'mysterious English gentlemen,'2 one of whom was apparently the Earl of Mar. West wrote to Mar from Venice on 1 January 1718, forwarding some music by Nicolini and saying that 'all of them now seem to guess at the gentlemen that were here.'3 In the summer of 1718 'West, the non-juror' had been banned from the British resident's house, but nevertheless kept company with Neil Brown, the British consul.4 He may also have been the West who, with Thomas Hobart, Thomas Coke's tutor, visited the library of the Convent of S.Giovanni in Verdara at Padua in June 1717.5



Westmacott was sent abroad by his father in 1792 'not then having attained [his] 16th year', attended by Casoni, a native of Carrara.1 In Rome the Abbate Carlo Bonomi (brother of Giuseppe the architect, whom Westmacott knew in London) introduced him to Canova, who became his teacher, 'a friend indeed to all who seek him'.1  Throughout his time in Rome Westmacott stayed in the Palazzo Zuccari on the Strada Gregoriana, where he was listed from 1793 to 1797 (although he had apparently left Rome in April 1796). In 1794 his address was shared by Casoni (who soon departed) and in 1796-7 by 'Dijne Iycer' (see under Lewis Disney-Ffytche).2 Westmacott recalled that in Rome he customarily modelled 'from the Life in alto relievo to the scale of nature each Morning & Evening, the day being occupied at the Vatican or other Galleries'.1 His name appears in Mrs Flaxman's diary at Rome in April and on Christmas Day 1793,3 and in April 1794 Westmacott was one of the signatories of the letter of thanks addressed by English artists in Rome to Prince Augustus (Rome List 1794). He 'generally' passed the summer months each year in Florence. On 8 May 1794 he applied to copy in the Uffizi;4 in July he passed two days at Lucca with John Holland and his wife,5 and he was in Florence until October that year (see J.M. Gandy). In the autumn of 1795 he travelled in the Abruzzi and Calabria, part of the way with the architect J.M. Gandy, the painter G.A. Wallis and Disney (possibly a Disney-Ffytche). He then went on to see Lake Fucino, Naples, Portici, Herculaneum and Pompei.6  Only two of Westmacott's Italian works survive; a marble copy of the Apollino, signed Rome 1794 (now at Rokeby and presumably commissioned by J.B.S. Morritt), and the terracotta bas-relief of Joseph and his Brethren (Accademia di S.Luca, Rome) with which he took a Gold medal in 1795 at the Accademia di S.Luca. His friend the sculptor Vincenzo Pacetti had improved the piece beforehand and Tatham observed that it 'was very superior to any of his competitors'.7 On 24 September 1797, after his departure from Italy, he was elected a member of the Florentine Accademia del Disegno (helped by the advocacy of Pacetti).8  Westmacott was also involved in the purchase of antiquities. From Florence on 7 July 1794 he told Henry Holland that 'Signor Canova, a Friend of mine in Rome, has promised me his assistance in procuring some Antique Fragments which were in the possession of Pirinisi',5 and on 20 June 1795 he wrote to Holland of the 'the small fragments which I sent to England'.9 He bought two antique figures and four medals from Pacetti who also gave him an antique head and restored for him the statue of a youth.10  In April 1796 Tatham told Holland that Westmacott was to leave Rome 'in a few days' and was expected to be in England 'about the latter end of June'.11 On his return journey he was robbed and injured on the Flaminian Way, but he managed to continue his route north through Florence and Bologna to Venice,5 where he arrived on 11 May.12 He came to England via Vienna, Dresden and Berlin, arriving at the close of 1796.
Though described in Italian archives as 'Tomaso' and 'Roberto' Weston, it was more probably Stephen who accompanied Bampfylde and Hatsel in Italy in 1773-4. He apparently joined Hatsel in Venice three months after Bampfylde had left to return home. In 1776 Stephen Weston published anonymously his Viaggiana: or, Detached Remarks on the Buildings, Pictures, Statues, Inscriptions, &c. of Ancient and Modern Rome. His collection of Greek and Roman coins and medals was sold in 1830 (DNB).


Soon after he came of age [in 1769] Whalley spent several years in Italy studying the fine arts.1 In July 1773 Thomas Banks listed a Mr Whalley among those who had arrived in Rome since August 1772.2 On 3 September 1773 Whalley wrote from Rome to his older brother disparaging the Italian nobility and saying he was about to start copying the ceiling paintings by Michelangelo in the Sistine Chapel in the afternoons, the mornings being devoted to drawing from the antique, and the evenings to anatomy; he described a Swiss painter in Rome who intended settling in London [presumably Fuseli] as being 'a full age before all his brethren of the brush' - [Benjamin] West was 'but a child to the person I am speaking of'.3 Richard C. Whalley presented letters of credit to Barazzi and Byres in Rome between June and December 1773.4 Whalley was said to have adopted republican ideas while he was abroad which were abandoned soon after his return.
In 1783, 'under the spur of economy', the Whalleys left their crescent house at Bath to live abroad.1 Having spent some time in France, they had sailed from Marseilles to Leghorn by November 1785 and spent the next six months in Tuscany, based in Pisa. Early in 1786 they witnessed the Carnival at Leghorn and during Lent they attended the assemblies of the Grand Duchess at Pisa; they also saw the Young Pretender in Florence. Early in June 1786 they were accompanying the Piozzis in Venice,2 and at the end of the month Thomas Whalley was in Zurich writing a long letter to his niece. He decried the Catholic church in Florence, whose priests 'sinking under the weight of their golden robes' were 'fuming the ignorant people round them with huge incense pots, finely wrought, and of massy silver'; the Great Duke had begun to act against such anomalies, having 'already suppressed above a hundred convents in Florence and its neighbourhood; and just before we left it, [he] had ordered mass to be said in the vulgar tongue'. Whalley's 'Notes on a journey from Italy through the Tyrol, Switzerland, and by the Rhine to Malines, in the summer of 1786' have been published.3 After spending the winter of 1786-7 in Brussels (where they again encountered the Piozzis in February 1787) they returned to England in the spring of 1787.
The high-spirited and intemperate Duke of Wharton appears to have paid four brief visits to Italy, each closely bound up with his Jacobite activities. On 26 August 1719 he was at Padua where, a week later, he was reported to be recovering from fever.1 His portrait by Rosalba Carriera (Windsor) probably dates from this time. Wharton was next in Rome on 5 March 1726 when he was invested by the Pretender with the Order of the Garter. He returned to Spain where he became a Catholic and married a maid of honour to the Spanish Queen. Shortly afterwards he returned with her to Rome, where on 26 October 1726 he resigned his title of Duke of Wharton. As he continued to behave in an excessive manner, the Pope requested him to leave, and he duly returned to Spain.2 In 1728, after he had fought with the Spanish army at the siege of Gibraltar, he visited the Pretender at Parma and was with him near Turin (see William Freeman), seeking a permanent place at the Jacobite court. He and his wife were in Genoa on 1 May 1728 proceeding to Milan and were in Parma on 14 May,3 but Wharton was not offered employment.
On the evidence of his letters to his family and friends, Wharton was a lively and cultured young man, with a particular interest in music (Wharton letters MSS; dates given in brackets). He travelled with his 'cello. He arrived at Leghorn on 23 October 1775 and spent six months in Italy, nearly four of them in Rome. Within a week he wrote that he was 'in the High Road to Taste in all Arts & Sciences' (27 Oct. 1775). During his few days at Florence he saw Gazzaniga's opera Perseo (15 Nov. 1775) and heard his 'old acquaintance Millico' sing, but he was perturbed by the most casual behaviour of both singers and audience. The comic opera was more successful; it contained a dance sequence lasting half an hour and 'it was well that the ladies wore drawers such Tumbling I never Beheld before' (27 Oct. 1775).  He arrived in Rome early in November and stayed near the Campus Martius (18 Nov. 1775). By the end of the month there were 'hardly above 30' Englishmen there (29 Nov. 1775), but he found Lord Powis and his companion William Patoun to join him on a course of antiquities from James Byres. The course had begun by 8 November and was over by 20 December, Wharton finding Byres's commentary 'wonderfully clever' (18 Nov. 1775). In December he was received by the Arcadians, 'the first Literary Society in Rome' (23 Dec. 1775), which he later described as 'sunk into a Gloom & Obscurity from which there are small hopes of it ever Emerging' (5 Apr. 1776). Wharton employed three masters at Rome, for drawing, Italian and music, this last a Milanese, Pietragna, a close friend of Boccherini. He met Santarelli, the Pope's 'Chapel Master', who was also the teacher of Pompeo Batoni's two daughters, Ruffina and Beneditta. Wharton was entranced by their singing and regularly attended the twice-weekly concerts in the Batoni home; Boccherini quintets were played (18 Nov. 1775), but the greatest event was when the sisters sang Pergolesi's Stabat Mater (26 Mar. 1776), 'the highest perfection of Music on Earth' (3 Apr. 1776), a composition to be ranked with the Passione of Jomelli and & the Miserere of Allegri as the greatest Italian music (7 Mar. 1776). He heard recitals by the English harpsichordist John Burton in December and March, and one of the last pieces he heard in Rome was Alexander's Feast, translated into Italian, sung at a concert given by the Duke of Gloucester (26 Mar. 1776), with whom he dined on 2 April (3 Apr. 1776). During the Carnival, 'but of eight days & the Masquerades, in all, but twenty four hours' (24 Jan. 1776), the best theatrical entertainment were the 'Farcical Comedies with Musical intermezzi' by Paesiello at the Teatro della Valle (6 Jan. 1776). The Carnival was the occasion for 'continued scenes of noise & riot' (26 Feb. 1776), but he was not impressed with the parade of fashion. 'Ignorance, & a desire to show & parade are the distinguishing characteristics of the Roman Nobility' (24 Jan. 1776), and for the Roman ladies 'dress is no object here, for they have no taste in it; finery and not elegance is their aim' (20 Mar. 1776). Wharton was evidently interested in dress; he told his cousin Mary Lloyd that it was always an indication of 'Province and Business' and that he would bring back some costume drawings he had made (26 Mar. 1776). His observations of Catholic ritual were essentially cynical, though he confessed to being moved by the Possesso of Pius VI in the first week of December and he shared with Lord Powis a five-minute audience with the new Pope (6 Dec. 1775). During the Easter ceremonies he described the Pope washing the feet of poor priests from different nations, while the Cardinals ate 'like any Alderman at a Turtle Feast' (5 Apr. 1776).  Wharton had spent some four weeks in Naples from mid-January. He twice ascended Vesuvius and visited all the neighbouring sights. He attended the concerts given by Sir William and Lady Hamilton, 'at whose House I was almost Every Evening that they were in Town' (7 Mar. 1776), and he was overwhelmed by the appearance of the Carlo theatre, in which 'all is gilt, nothing painted'; the London opera house was 'a band box' in comparison (24 Jan. 1776). Wharton also described to his cousin the ceremony of two young nuns taking the veil in Naples (7 Mar. 1776).  He left Rome on 19 April and went to Venice via Bologna, travelling with a French physician. In the course of the journey he observed how 'the farther one gets from Rome the better the Country appears' (4 May 1776). On 9 May they reached Venice, where Wharton formed the highest opinion of the gondoliers: 'Their Honesty & their Wit are equally Great', he told his cousin, and they sang verses by Ariosto and Tasso (10 May 1776). He did not see the Ascension festivities which were delayed by bad weather, but he did observe that the bucentaur 'might easily overset' because it was so high (17 May 1776). He was proposing to leave Italy through Padua, Verona and Vicenza, and to travel with the French physician via Strasbourg to Paris. He left Italy with much regret; 'notwithstanding all its vast disadvantages from the Works of Tyranny & Superstition', Italy was 'the finest Countrey in the World & the most worthy of the Examination & Curiosity of Every one who loves Instruction' (17 May 1776).
Stephen Whatley is listed as the anonymous author of A Short account of A late Journey to Tuscany, Rome, And other parts of Italy [1741],1 although the preface states that the account was written by 'two young Persons who went thither to improve themselves in Painting', and who were 'glad to oblige Mr A.B.' The text refers to 'my brother and I'. The authors state they could not keep a journal 'in a country where our Papers and Books were so often liable to be looked into by bigoted Inquisitors'. They spent a year in Florence and refer to the late Duke Cosimo III (who d. 1723) as 'just dead'. They witnessed the 'whole Furie' of an execution of a man who had murdered his wife; the malefactor was attended by brothers of the Misericordia. In Rome they commented on the great number of Jews. The Short Account is essentially an anti-clerical pamphlet.
Probably the 'Watley' in Italy in the winter of 1787-8 (Watkins, Letters, 2:90n).




On leaving Cambridge Whitbread set out in 1783 on a grand tour which concentrated on northern and eastern Europe and ended with a rapid visit to Italy.1 His tutor was the historian William Coxe who had previously accompanied Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) to Venice in June 1779. They went through Germany and Sweden to St Petersburg (which they left in April 1785) and returned through Poland, Germany and Switzerland to Italy. Coxe later wrote that he collected material for his Sketches of the Lives of Correggio & Parmegiano [1823] at Parma in 1785 and 1786. By January 1786 they were in Naples where Lord Bulkeley had met them; he thought Whitbread 'a very pleasing young man' and said he was intending to pass the following summer in Vienna.2 On 11 January the 10th Earl of Pembroke met the 'young rich brewer Whitbread' in Rome; he commented that Coxe was being paid £800 per annum to accompany him although he would not pass on to his charge 'either modesty or bon ton'.3 Whitbread and Coxe were still in Rome in March 1786,4 and had reached Turin by 9 May.5
Whitbread arrived at Naples with a Mr Palmer and [Francis?] Dickins in January 1773 bearing a letter of introduction from Lord Rochford;1 he was presumably the 'Wilfred' who arrived at Venice with Dickins on 30 April that year.2

Probably also the White listed as a friend of Jacob Houblon in Italy between 1758 and 1761,1 and the White who arrived in Venice on 4 December 1761.2



Carlson Whitelock' and William 'Whitecombe' were reported to be in Rome on 25 December 1723,1 and on 4 February 1724 'Whitelock' and William Wickham were in Padua.2



Mr Weakstead Scolar to Zoffany' arrived in Rome in 1768.1 In December 1769 Father Thorpe told Lord Arundell that Wickstead was a suitable artist for copying a small version of van Dyck's Family of Charles I in SS.Apostoli. The copy was duly begun in July 1770; it was mentioned again in June 1771, and was dispatched to Wardour Castle in August 1772 (the same picture was apparently also copied for Lord Arundell by Anne Forbes).2 In 1772 James Byres sent to William Constable Wickstead's portrait of the Roman dwarf Baiocho (Burton Constable) and Byres's inventory of 1790 lists A Girl reading by Wickstead.3  Though few of Wickstead's works are now known, Thomas Banks wrote from Rome on 31 July 1773 that 'little Wickstead has had most of the portraits to paint last season, owing to the endeavours of Messrs. Norton and Byres to carry every gentleman they could get hold of to see him', but the arrival of Hugh Barron had 'proved no small mortification'.4 This close association between Wickstead and Byres, and Wickstead's reputation for 'small whole-length portraits', suggests that Wickstead may have painted two Roman conversation-pieces featuring Byres with a number of English tourists dateable 1773 (Springhill, Ulster, and Audley End; Ham House and priv. coll.).5 At some stage Wickstead had met William Beckford of Somerley (who had been in Rome and was to take him, with the painter George Robertson, to Jamaica,6 probably in 1773-4).


The precise identities of the four Wilbraham brothers in Italy between 1764 and 1773 are not easy to establish. A Wilbraham, probably the oldest brother George, was in Rome in December 1764, but after three weeks set out for Greece and Asia Minor with Robert Fitzgerald, Thomas Skipwith and Dr Turnbull, intending to be back in Rome by October 1765.1 This was probably the Wilbraham who accompanied James Byres on a tour through southern Italy and Sicily in March-October 1766. On 27 May 1767 a 'Giovanni' Wilbraham arrived in Venice2 but, since George Wilbraham was elected to the Society of Dilettanti in 1770, it is possible that Giovanni was written in error for Giorgio. See Roger Wilbraham.

Randle Wilbraham spent nearly five years abroad, the first three in Germany and the Middle East. He went as far as Persepolis and returned through the Holy Land and Greece to Sicily, where he landed at Messina on 8 August 1797.1 He came to Naples on 26 November, finding the English 'muster pretty strong here' (26 Nov.). By this time he was looking forward 'with no little impatience' to returning home to England, and well aware that 'the longer I stay out of England the more John Bullish I become'. He visited Caserta and the S.Carlo theatre and had had the opportunity to talk 'Lancashire' with Emma Hamilton, but the weather was awful (11 Dec. 1797). After a delay in obtaining a passport (16 Jan. 1798), he came to Rome at the end of January 1798. Although he found the city tranquil he commented (with splendid pedantry) that 'the present situation of affairs does not render this place much calculated in the present moment for so long a residence as a traveller would wish to make in it', and he left after some two weeks 'more from the fear of detention than from any apprehension of danger' (4 Feb. 1798). He was in Florence by 14 February having encountered the French army on the road some twenty miles from Rome, but the soldiers had behaved 'with great moderation' (14 Feb. 1798). He was impatient with the Carnival in Florence, and visited Leghorn before going on north to Venice, 'perhaps the most singular place I have seen, but the French have reduced it to a wretched state by plundering the churches & the Arsenal in which latter they have left nothing but the wrecks of ships & the shattered remains of the Buccentaur. As in all the north of Italy they have behaved most shamefully' (12 Mar. 1798). He prepared his mother for his arrival home by describing how he had cut his hair short 'à la Brutus' at Naples and wore it without powder; he was now 'somewhat taller, a great deal stouter than when I left England, & extremely sunburnt' (12 Mar. 1798).
Roger Wilbraham was in Florence between February and September 1773. He was doubtless also one of the two unidentified Wilbrahams in Florence in 1772, and the subject of several other references to 'Wilbraham' in Italy 1770-3, as cited below. From Turin on 14 April 1770 William Lynch wrote a letter of introduction to Horace Mann at Florence for Wilbraham, 'whose brother I believe you formerly had at Florence'.1 In November 1770 Cardinal Albani in Rome acknowledged Mann's letter of introduction for 'Wilbraham'.2 A 'Vilhotran', possibly Wilbraham, was listed in Florence on 10 August 1771.3 In March 1772 a Wilbraham was in Naples, 'still in Italy', as George Tierney told William Constable, 'and has been very successful at play which I suppose is his motive for staying abroad: at least it makes matters easier'.4  In November 1772 Thomas Orde met in Florence 'Messrs Wilbraham' and by December two Wilbrahams, presumably brothers, had been included in Zoffany's Tribuna (Windsor) in which they are seen closely inspecting the Venus de Medici; they were still in Florence in February 1773.5 Roger Wilbraham was writing to Charles Townley from Florence between February and September 1773; he was in close touch with Thomas Patch and evidently interested in antiquities; Townley made a payment to him in June, and in October 1773 he was at Pisa, going on to Genoa and Marseilles.6 One of the Wilbrahams who sat to Zoffany may therefore be assumed to have been Roger; the other was possibly his youngest brother Thomas (b. 1751); in 1814 the two figures were identified as 'Mr Wilbraham' and 'T. Wilbraham'.7 A portrait of Roger Wilbraham attributable to Maron is in a private collection.8

Having inherited a good estate, Wilcocks chose to devote his life to classical scholarship. He passed two years in Italy where he was universally admired, from Clement XIII, who called him 'the blessed heretick' (DNB), to the Abbé Grant, for whom he was 'this heavenly man', 'the incomparable Mr Willcocks'. In the course of his stay he prepared his Roman Conversations [1763], subtitled Being some of the Principal Characters of Roman History (The Subjects of six weeks Conversation at or near Rome) Compiled for the Use of Places of Education, particularly Westminster School; the conversations had taken place between 'three young Englishmen' and 'a Clergyman of the Church of England, who had attended one of these young Gentlemen at School'. He was also to publish in 1763 a paper on the subterranean apartments at Civita Turchino. The Abbé Grant's letters reveal something of Wilcocks's travels in Italy.1 On 14 June 1760 he had just returned from Frascati to Rome and was thinking of going to Tuscany for the summer, then returning to Rome and going on to Naples. He was still in Rome on 5 July, when Grant was to take Wilcocks to see Cardinal Spinelli and examine Hebrew manuscripts of the Bible (5 Jul.). Soon afterwards Wilcocks made a three-month tour through Tuscany, Lombardy and Venice which, commented Grant, did 'his health infinite service' (22 Oct.); by 25 July he had gone with Thomas Jenkins to Florence to meet Thomas Wynn (later 1st Baron Newborough) and Sir Henry Mainwaring.2 Wilcocks spent three weeks at Venice with Wynn, and they went on to Verona, Wilcocks returning to Rome early in October (22 Oct.). In January and February 1761 he was in Naples (9 Jan.) where he procured an account of the prisons for James Grant of Castle Grant (7 Feb.). On 3 March 'Monsieur Welleaocks Inglese' was in Capua.3 He was again in Rome by July, intending to return home before winter (1 Aug.). Laurence Sterne saw him pass through Paris in April 1762.4  Wilcocks had had some contact with artists in Rome; Thomas Robinson (later 2nd Baron Grantham) introduced him to Benjamin West, whom he helped in his study of ancient costume through the examination of cameos,5 and in 1764 James Martin saw in Forrester's Rome studio 'some beautiful Views' done for 'Lord Tavistock, Mr Wilcox & Mr Crew'.6
He came to Verona with his servant from Switzerland; they were retained at the border for two days, then kept in the lazzaretto until 20 September (ASVR US XXXVIII)
Pietro Gugliemo Wilkens' / 'P. William Wilkens' signed three memorials from British merchants at Naples in 1764, 1765 and 1767.1 He was probably also the 'Guhilelmo Wilkin' in Naples travelling with Isaac Jamineau in October 1762.2
Wilkes slipped off to Paris in December 1763, just before his expulsion from the House of Commons on a charge of seditious libel, and immediately after his duel with Samuel Martin. On 1 November 1764 he told Lord Temple [Richard Grenville] that he intended to leave 'the expensive and luxurious Paris' to 'live quite alone in some town of Italy, neither seen nor known, visiting nor visited, boarding in a good family', occupying himself with a 'history of my own country'.1 He described his journey to Italy in a series of charming letters to his fifteen-year-old daughter Polly (from which the itinerary is taken),2 in the course of which he reminded her that a letter 'is twenty days in the common passage from London to Naples: if the wind is contrary, it is more'.  He passed quickly through northern Italy to Rome; John Needham was the most agreeable object he had seen at Turin; at Milan he had been treated 'in a most distinguished manner' and at Parma there were the Correggio paintings in the dome of the cathedral 'very few of which are in tolerable preservation'. At Bologna he paid his compliments 'to mademoiselle Corradini and dined every day at her house'. He did not tell his daughter that Gertrude Maria Corradini,3 previously John Udny's mistress, was now his and was accompanying him to Naples. When he came to Florence he did not go to the resident's [Horace Mann's] 'to save him the embarras of returning a visit to a man so very obnoxious to the English (or rather Scottish [a dig at Lord Bute]) ministry as myself'. He lodged at the Locanda di Carlo [Hadfield's] and the French minister Lorenzi carried him 'to the most wretched of all entertainments, the conversazione of the Italians'.4 On 14 February he arrived in Rome where he spent eight days with Winckelmann.5 The two men evidently respected each other and two months later, when Wilkes was in Naples, Winckelmann sent him 'an antique sepulchral urn of alabaster' which Wilkes had inscribed to the memory of the Rev. Charles Churchill. In Rome Corradini attracted attention; Andrew Lumisden thought Wilkes's two female companions (the second presumably Corradini's mother) had been picked up at Parma, but a week later he said 'the girl he has along with him is a Bolognese dancer',6 and John Holroyd confirmed that Wilkes, 'a charming, wicked, honest, jolly, candid sort of fellow', had with him in Rome 'a most exquisite female, an Italian that he collected at Paris'.7  On 26 February Wilkes arrived in Naples, a resort he had chosen for its climate and situation '& most disagreable inhabitants'.7 He intended to write 'two great works': to prepare an edition of the poems of his lamented friend and collaborator the Rev. Charles Churchill who had died in France in November 1764, and to compile a History of England from the Revolution. 'I live much retired, and avoid as much as possible all the Neapolitan nobility', he wrote on 18 March, but for two weeks in March this retirement was interrupted by James Boswell, who had pursued Wilkes to Naples. Boswell wrote to him on 2 March in Latin ('Caesar ultor Brutum in exilio salutat'), and there followed a brief friendship which Boswell recorded in his Journal.8 Among other things Wilkes told Boswell he could not stand the Corradini's relatives whom she had brought to live with them, but he was grateful nonetheless for his mistress's 'divine gift of lewdness'. Before Boswell left on 19 March they had climbed Vesuvius together and inspected the Villa Pietracatella at Vomero, where Wilkes settled in April. He had first lodged 'at an inn, called Stephano's; a large good house on the banks of the sea', but on 3 April he moved to his villa, telling his friend Cotes his new house would cost 'about thirty-five pounds a-year, but I am obliged to buy some furniture'. Wilkes worked hard and lived privately with Corradini and her mother. 'I am from morning to night with a pen or a book in my hand. That is my present business, which entirely occupies me' he wrote on 9 April, and a week later he told his daughter 'I have not been out but once for a fortnight, nor seen any body but Sir William Stanhope and major [Richard] Ridley'.  In May Wilkes charitably accommodated Holroyd and one of his companions (probably Bolton) who was ill,11 and at Lady Orford's he had met William Hamilton. Like Mann in Florence, Hamilton was not anxious to meet him 'oftener than can not be avoided',9 and the Neapolitan minister Tanucci had also chosen to ignore Wilkes's letter of recommendation.10 By 21 May Wilkes had 'above half finished my edition of Churchill', but the Corradini and her mother had left. He told Cotes, 'I live alone, and write or read ten hours a-day regularly'. Corradini's departure gave rise to much apparently libellous speculation; she was said to have been pregnant and to have taken all Wilkes's papers with her, but Horace Mann was probably right in saying 'I believe there is no more in the affair than that they could not agree'.12 On 25 June Wilkes told his daughter he was taking the opportunity of sailing back to Marseilles with his English friend Major Ridley and they duly sailed on 27 June. Wilkes had not been impressed with Italy or with travelling. 'I expected to see a very clever and polite people', he told his daughter; 'on the contrary, you cannot imagine any thing more ignorant, more ill-bred, or more coarse, than they are. Their conversation is shocking to a modest ear', and he added that 'travelling too is worse than I can describe'.

From March 1752 the Abbé Wilkins was acting as an agent for Ralph Howard in Rome.1 One of his letters (25 October 1752), which discussed work by Vierpyl and enclosed an account of payments to Chambers, Vernet and Reynolds, is signed Wm.Wilkins.2 He died in 1758 after eight months lingering illness and left his widow and children miserably poor.3



Wilkinson and his wife appear to have spent some seven years in Europe, though the evidence of their travels is not complete. 'Mr Wilkinson and his Lady' were listed in Rome on 12 December 1791.1 On 6 November 1793 Mrs Flaxman called on Mrs Wilkinson in Rome2 and between December 1793 and February 1794 Mr and Mrs Montagu Wilkinson were staying at Margherita's hotel in Rome; on 13 February they entertained Sir Robert Herries and Sarah Bentham at a dinner party.3 From Rome on 6 July 1794 it was reported that Mrs Wilkinson (the same?) had lost a son at Naples through smallpox.4 In May 1794 Mrs Wilkinson was to accompany Dr Edward Ash from Rome to Verona5 and in September the Wilkinsons were expected in Munich from Switzerland.6 They were then in Venice on 26 September,7 and in Munich by 23 October, when Thomas Brand described them as 'an English family which I dislike much'; he had showed them great favours which had been received 'with no great share of gratitude'.8  In 1795, between 18 September and 3 October, the Wilkinsons ('Martin Vilhinson' with his wife and daughter) were staying at Venice and twice visiting Padua.9 In 1796 they were in Naples in July, Mrs Wilkinson about to give birth and the French invasion imminent. 'Poor Montagu Wilkinson', wrote Lady Berwick, was 'nearly frightened out of his senses' as he waited to go to Sicily, while 'his wife poor soul has only a few weeks to reckon & is terrified at the idea of being brought to bed here or in a ship'.10 On 25 October she was able to report that the Montagu Wilkinsons had been among the last to leave Naples, 'after his wife had recovered from her lying in. He is gone to Ancona still a safe road and from thence embarks for Trieste'.11

At Rome in February 1798 William Artaud found himself 'reduced to the society of [Edward?] Gordon and Wilkinson, I am almost frozen with the halting syllables of the one, and although pleased with the easy good nature of the other, yet I am often shocked at the useless and haughty tenor of his existence'.1 Artaud subsequently described Wilkinson as a great traveller who had been to Egypt. At the end of March Wilkinson and an emigrant priest went with Artaud from Rome to Florence.2

On 25 November 1729 Williams was in Florence with Benjamin Bathurst.1 By 8 December he had arrived in Rome with Bathurst and Henry Legge, with whom he was said to be travelling.2 Stosch described Williams in Rome as a spirited youth; 'his natural vivacity, his too great zeal for the King and his lack of discretion in actions and conversation involved him in a thousand scrapes from which I fortunately rescued him.'3 In January the Pretender had been shocked to see that Williams and Bathurst had their box at the theatre decorated in exactly the same style as his own.4 Williams left Rome on 16 May 1730 for Bologna,3 and he was writing to Francis Colman from Genoa on 23 November recommending William Hoare as a portrait painter.5


On 23 April 1738 Williams and Anderson were at the Turin Academy.1 They were presumably the John Williams and John Anderson in Padua on 10 March 1739.2 On 16 April Horace Walpole in Rome told Horace Mann in Florence that he had already 'written you my sentiments by Mr Williams about the courier': this Williams has been tentatively identified as John Williams (d. by 1775, sec. to Richard West, 1716-42),3 and he was also possibly the Williams seen by Spence at Turin sometime between October 1739 and September 1740.4





Williams went to Vienna with his stepbrother, the 7th Viscount Bulkeley and his Viscountess, and while they went on to Italy, he stayed some six months under the watchful eye of Sir Robert Keith.1 In April 1786 he came to Milan to meet Lord Bulkeley and return with him to England. From Milan (23 Apr.) Williams thanked Sir Robert for his attention in Vienna, disarmingly describing himself as 'a giddy headed foolish goose' and alleging that his reputation had preceded him to Milan. Bulkeley arrived on 22 April to find Williams (twelve years his junior) 'much improved' though he still needed less addiction 'to lounging' (28 Apr.); he found that Williams had left his heart in Vienna 'and rallies slowly notwithstanding great prudence & regularity' (5 May). Williams and the Bulkeleys were to leave Milan on 6 May 1786 and return to England through Genoa and Turin.

Williams spent some six years in Italy, where he appears to have been active principally as a copyist. Such modest activity did not undermine his self-confidence. 'He seems to have a great deal of Enthusiasm,' Henry Quin wrote, 'apparently mingled with a degree of chagrin that the world don't think as highly of his works as himself'.1  He was probably the Mr Williams noticed in Rome in December 1782.2 He copied works by Raphael in the Vatican (Strickland) and the Callipygian Venus at the Farnesina (NGI). By December 1784 he was in Florence, where he stayed until June 1785. In the Uffizi he made two copies of Titian's Venus of Urbino and a study of the Venus de Medici.3 The three works were sent home from Florence, as a note in Williams sketchbook (NGI) explains, in a packing case also containing things belonging to a Mr Tom Blighe, who was to pay for one third of the expenses. By 6 October 1785 Williams was in Bologna, when he was elected to Honorary Membership of the Accademia Clementina.4 He made studies after Domenichino (Martyrdom of St Agnes), Guido Reni (St Paul comforting St Peter in Prison) and Guercino (Haagar and Ishmael and A Sybil's Head).5 The following month he was in Parma, where he accompanied Henry Quin and made for him a sketch of Correggio's famous Madonna and St Jerome. On 5 November 1785 Quin visited Williams's lodgings and saw his drawings of works copied at Bologna and Florence; he also commented that 'the young Gentleman almost told me in direct terms that he stood the highest in the rank of Connoisseurs in Rome'.5 He was possibly the 'Guilelmo Williams', English painter aged twenty-four in 1784, who was listed as living in the Strada Laurina in Rome 1784-6.6 Williams's sketchbook (NGI) gives a limited indication of his movements in Italy. It is inscribed 'Bologna' on the cover page; two drawings produced in Rome of a statue at the Farnesina are followed by drawings of bronze statues and antique sculpture at the 'Parma Academy' and some sketches made in Venice (one after Tintoretto). The next leaf is inscribed 'Dublin 1789'.  James Byres in Rome owned a portrait of Aubrey Beauclerk by 'Mr Williams', probably Solomon Williams.7
Williams was a merchant banker in Venice, where he lived from c.1680 until returning to London in 1711. He was a figure of some influence and had once begun negotiations for a Treaty of Commerce between England and Venice. He also had some dealings in works of art and in Rome he knew the antiquary Ficoroni and the painter Andrea Procaccini. When he left Venice his brother Samuel, who tried to obtain the post of British consul in 1716, continued his business with Joseph Smith (F. Vivian, Consul Smith Collection,  exh. cat. Frankfurt etc. [1989], 12-13).
Williams had ridden to Florence 'post from Venice round by Genoa and returns thither on horse back tomorrow' (HMC Hastings, 3:108; Mann, 21 Oct. 1755).
Williamson travelled from Viterbo through Tuscany with John Maxwell, William Rouet and two other Englishmen in the summer of 1742 (Caldwell Papers, 2:32).






Willison was sent to Rome as a promising young artist by his uncle George Dempster. He arrived in July 1760 with an introduction to Thomas Jenkins from the poet George Keate.1 On 9 August Andrew Lumisden wrote that he had 'prevailed upon M. Mengs to receive M. Willison into his school. I wish he may make proper use of the instruction and example of so able a master'.2 Willison did not long enjoy his studies since Mengs left for Naples in August 1761 and Madrid the following month. At Easter 1761 'Giorgio Uilison Pittore - 26' was living 'seguita Vittoria verso il Corso'.3  Little is known of Willison's work in Italy apart from his celebrated portrait of James Boswell (SNPG) for which sittings took place on 4, 7 and 10 May 1765.4 In May 1763 he was in Florence applying to copy Titian's Venus of Urbino in the Uffizi.5 A Mr Irvine (possibly the convalescent Irvine recorded in Italy in 1762- 3) commissioned a copy of Raphael's Madonna della sedia. In July 1764 James Martin saw in Willison's studio in Rome good copies from van Dyck (Three Children of Charles I), Raphael (a Self portrait) and Correggio (the Holy Family from Parma) and an original composition of a Vestal Virgin in which two more figures had been chalked in; Martin thought they would be 'rather crowded', but he evidently admired Willison and said he studied 'very hard'.6 In September Martin went with Willison to the French Academy and to the Accademia di S.Luca.7 That same month Lumisden wrote to Boswell (then in Siena) that Willison was about to send the finished portrait of Boswell to his uncle, Dempster, 'along with the Sybil, which he intends as a present for him. He sends likewise the Vestal [presumably the picture seen by Martin] to L. Mountstuart'.8 In May 1765 Sir William Farington saw in Rome Willison's portrait of Godfrey Bagnall Clarke 'very like, & well Painted',9 and on 22 May Lumisden told John Strange that 'Wilson [sic] has been doing some portraits in which he has succeeded very well'.10 In October 1765 Willison had recovered from a fever.11 He is said to have stayed in Rome until 1767, but by April 1767 he was exhibiting at the SA in London, his address given as Greek Street, Soho, his exhibits including two portraits of a young lady in the character of a vestal and in the character of a sybil (presumably versions of the pictures mentioned by Lumisden above).
Chichester Willoughby, an Irishman, was in Padua on 20 March 1726.1 On 26 October 'Willugby' an Irishman was brought to Rome by Thomas Hanmer, to be employed by the Pretender to go to Vienna.2 Late in 1726 the Pretender sent Willoughby, 'an English man' to Muscovy, though he had only 'just come out of the Surgeon's hands at Rome for a venereal distemper'.3
Willoughby' and 'Digby' were together at Capua on 2 June 1753.1 In 1754 Henry Willoughby sat both to Batoni (Clark/ Bowron 179; priv. coll.) and to Blanchet;2 a third portrait by Mengs (Providence, Rhode Island) has also been identified as Henry Willoughby.3
On 25 May 1771 Father Thorpe reported that Bob Willoughby was in Rome 'for seven or eight days upon a frolick: he was always remarkable for expeditions'; he had left Rome by 7 June (Thorpe letters MSS, 25 May, 7 Jun. 1771).
Thomas Willoughby was in Padua on 14 June 1746,1 and a pastel portrait by Rosalba Carriera at Birdsall, said to represent him, was probably painted soon after.2
In May 1744 at Leghorn he signed a memorial concerning Mediterranean trade.1 Payments to the firm of Wills & Leigh were made by Lord Huntingdon in January and February 1756, and by Lord Bute between 8 November 1773 and 16 August 1775 (Haughton Wills being named in the Bute accounts).2 In June 1758 Haughton Wills was about to sail to England bringing some medals from Horace Mann to Horace Walpole.3 From 1757 there are references to the merchant firm of Wills & Leigh at Naples.4 See Roger Leigh.
Mr Wills an english painter' was in Rome by May 1734.1 He may also have been the J. Wills at Padua on 22 September 1733.2

In 1798-9 Willyams served in the Mediterranean as domestic chaplain to Lord St Vincent and chaplain on the Swiftsure. A signed water-colour by him 'A view of the Grand Canal taken from the window of Pedrillo's Hotel [Venice]' is dated 2 September 1799 (London art market 1990); in 1802 he published his Voyage up the Mediterranean .. with a description of the Battle of the Nile, and a detail of events that occurred subsequent to the battle in various parts of the Mediterranean.
Wilmot brought a letter (dated 25 September 1778) from Poyntz at Turin to Collet at Genoa; it was acknowledged on 3 October 1778, when Wilmot was waiting to sail to Nice (Genoa cons.corr.MSS).

Wilson first went to Italy as a young student of painting in 1799; he sailed to Leghorn and spent time in Rome and Naples. In the course of his stay he developed his abilities as a connoisseur which enabled him to become a prominent dealer, but these activities and his subsequent visits to Italy fall outside the scope of this Dictionary (see Brigstocke, Buchanan).
Daniel Wilson sat to Batoni in Rome for a portrait dated 1773 (Clark/Bowron 358, priv. coll.); he was possibly the Wilson seen in Florence the previous summer (Cotes jnl.MSS).


When Wilson set out for Venice in the autumn of 1750 he was in his mid-thirties and had already some reputation as a portrait and view painter.1 In June 1751 he wrote that he had been in Venice 'abt 8 months'; he had studied Titian 'as much as ever I could' and was doing a portrait of the German Ambassador 'among other things'; he had also befriended 'Sigr Zuccarelli, a famous painter of this place', who, in return for his portrait by Wilson [now Tate Gall.], was to give him one of his own pictures. In the same letter Wilson said that 'Mr [Joseph] Smith (blessed be the name) our Consul here is exceedingly kind to me ... among other things he has got me the painting of Mr Sackville [Lord John Frederick Sackville?], which he is to send to my Lord Middlesex'.2 Wilson also painted William Lock (untraced) who, with Thomas Jenkins,3 accompanied him to Rome at the close of 1751. Wilson's drawings indicate their route lay along the coast to Loreto and then across to Rome through Foligno. Wilson was sharing rooms with Thomas Jenkins by the Piazza di Spagna ('verso Propaganda Fide') at Easter 1752 ('Sigre Cnis' and 'Sigre Wilzon' with 'Samuello Hon' [Samuel Hone]) and 1753 ('Ricardo Wilshon' and 'Tomaso Ginkins').4  Wilson quickly achieved success in Rome with his landscapes, to the extent that he finally renounced portraiture. The only portrait he painted in Rome appears to have been that of Thomas Hollis (1752; Harvard) who also commissioned a view of the Villa Madama. Joseph Vernet urged him to concentrate on landscape, and it was in exchange for one of Wilson's landscapes that Mengs painted his portrait in 1752 (NMW), declaring that 'he never met with but two English artists of superior genius, they were R. Wilson and Athenian Stuart'. Horace Mann, hearing of Wilson's success, recommended him in March 1752 to Cardinal Albani, who pledged his support.5 In August Wilson said the paintings he had then finished for Ralph Howard 'have recommended me so much to Cardinal Albani, that I have several bespoke to be done for him and other People of Rank'.6  Ralph Howard (later Viscount Wicklow) was a particularly generous patron. On 13 January 1752 (within weeks of his arrival in Rome) Wilson had signed a receipt for monies received from Howard 'on acct of 4 pictures that I am doing for him'.7 These he finished by August but retained to support his (unsuccessful) bid for election to the Accademia di S.Luca; in November he sent them with three others to James Russel for dispatch to Dublin, the principal items being two Landscapes with Banditti (almost certainly those now in the NMW), and the Regulus and Cincinnatus in the Brinsley Ford collection. Another Irish patron was Joseph Henry, who commissioned two companion pieces of Tivoli, both dated 1752 [NGI].  Lord Dartmouth, who was to be Wilson's second outstanding patron, arrived in Rome at the end of 1752. He bought two large Roman views, one dated 1753 (now YCBA and Tate Gallery), and a remarkable series of some 68 drawings, of which 25 are known;8 twenty are carefully composed studio productions of the environs of Rome, each dated 1754. These drawings contrast with the great freedom of Wilson's other Roman drawings, which range from studies of leaves and individual figures, to views and antiquities, and are principally contained in two sketchbooks, one (VAM) inscribed Studies & Designs by R. Wilson done at Rome ye year 1752 Caffe delle Inglesi, the other (YCBA) inscribed Studies by R. Wilson at Rome 1754. The first confirms a visit to Naples (Dartmouth was said to have taken Wilson there, i.e. April-May 1753) and the second has many subjects from the Campagna. It has been observed that Wilson's drawing technique changed at Rome, from black or red chalk on white paper (used up to 1753) to chalk and stump on grey paper, a technique practised at the French Academy at Rome.9  Evidence of Wilson's activity in his five or six remaining years at Rome is relatively sparse. Four of his Roman views were bought by Matthew Brettingham for Lord Leicester sometime before 1754. In 1754, according to a contemporary description, Wilson was sketching in Tivoli with 'the Earls of Pembroke Thanet and Essex and Ld Viscount Bolingbroke who dined and spent the day together on the Spot under a Large Tree'.10 One of the two companion views of Rome painted for Stephen Beckingham (priv. colls.) is dated 1754. In February 1755 Thomas Brand (1717- 70) in Rome told Lord Strafford that Wilson was 'in such repute as to be employed by many of the Italians & I think he is really the best painter of that sort I have seen abroad'.11 Brand obtained for him Wilson's Ego fui in Arcadia (1755; priv. coll.). Wilson acquired a number of pupils in Rome: Robert Crone and John Plimmer in 1755, the German A.F. Harper (in Rome 1752- 6), and probably the Danes Johannes Wiedewelt and Johan Mandelberg (who arrived in Rome respectively in 1754 and 1755).12 Jonathan Skelton said that Jenkins, Plimmer, Robert Crone and Richard Wilson 'were like one Person' in Rome.13  It is not clear when Wilson left Italy. Hayward said he left Rome in August 1756;14 there are two drawings (RA) of a smoking crater [Vesuvius?] dated 1756 and another, allegedly by Wilson and entitled The Roman Academy of 1757 with the artists and living model, was in the Davenport Bromley sale (14 May 1844). On 24 August 1757 Jenkins sent his compliments to Wilson through William Chambers in London,15 implying he had then returned home. Whenever it was he returned he was then in profit; 'he took from England eighty pounds, and brought back one hundred', Farington recorded in his Biographical Note.16
A 'Wilson', travelling as a special messenger in the service of John, Lord Hervey, had come to Leghorn in February 1791 (ASF SE 2340).


Wilton had lived some years on the Continent studying in Brabant and Paris, before he came to Italy. He said he went to Italy in 1747,1 but the earliest reference to him in Rome is Bubb Dodington's recommendation of him to Cardinal Albani on 4 January 1749.2 At Easter 1749 (and 1750-1) he was living in the Palazzo Zuccari on the Strada Felice with Patch, Simon Vierpyl and Matthew Brettingham.3  Wilton soon achieved success at Rome. In 1750 he received a gold medal at the Accademia di S.Luca for his Cain killing Abel,4 and he received commissions from Lord Malton, who was in Rome in 1749 and 1750, for copies of the Venus de Medici and a Faun.5 He was also favoured by William Lock of Norbury (who was in Rome by January 1752); they were said to have been 'inseparable companions' in Italy.6 According to Nollekens, however, Wilton had moved to Florence in 1751,7 and Wilton was elected to the Florentine Accademia del Disegno on 9 January 1752.8 In February 1752 he was about to return to Rome from Florence for a few days and was (unsuccessfully) seeking permission to have a cast made from a bust of Julius Caesar in the collection of the marchese Casali.9 Also in February 1752 arrangements were made for James Tyrrell to pay Wilton 300 crowns in three equal instalments on behalf of Ralph Howard.10 In July 1753 Tyrrell had to tell Howard that Wilton 'promises to finish the Venus next autumn; there is a spot on the nose, for which I can find no remedy but that of the good old Gentleman Job'.11  Between May and July 1752 Joshua Reynolds had painted Wilton's portrait in Florence (NPG). By September 1753 Wilton, 'that ingenious modest sculptor,' was living in Horace Mann's guest house on the Via de' Bardi, and in November Mann was describing his work with approval: 'a statue he did at Rome, and a copy of the Venus which he made here [in Florence] for Lord Rockingham [Malton] gained him great applause. Swift's bust, an original [otherwise unrecorded, but possibly of Lord Chatham], and a most glorious one of Homer, with some others already in England, are proof of his abilities. He has finished another Venus [presumably that for Ralph Howard] which is admired by all the professors as well as connoisseurs here; a Bacchus for Lord Tylney of his own invention, far advanced, with many other works which will be seen in England'.12  In February 1754 Wilton was about to go to Rome ('in two or three weeks time') in an attempt to obtain a cast of an Apollo (presumably the Apollo Belvedere) from the architect Paul Posi in Rome; Albani was able to buy him a cast in March.13 In 1755 Wilton carved the bust of Dr Cocchi (VAM), the only ad vivum bust he is known to have carved in Italy,14 and in January and February that year his existence was enlivened by the presence of Robert Adam, who had a letter of introduction from George Mercer, a mason in London. Together they went skating on the frozen Arno and Wilton took Adam round the museums, proving himself 'a very fine fellow' and 'an obliging companion'. Wilton introduced him to Clérisseau and, with a young Swiss G.I. Ritter, they studied architecture together. Wilton also gave Adam (forlorn) advice on how best to spend his time in Italy: he should abandon 'the great ones' and after first seeing Rome he should go to Naples and return incognito 'and live private', studying and improving.15  Adam left Florence on 20 February 1755 and Wilton returned to England soon after, accompanied by the sculptor G.B. Capezzoli16 and, possibly, by Cipriani and William Chambers.17 Six years later James Adam said how disappointed Mann had been never to hear from Wilton after his return to England, 'so that with justice Sir Horace says he's a low born fellow without education or gratitude'18 but this opinion was not completely shared.
A high-bred gentleman' and 'an expert cricketer', young Winchilsea described his Italian journey in a series of letters to his mother who, as Lady Charlotte Fermor, had herself been in Italy in 1739-41, see Thomas, 1st Earl of Pomfret. His letters1 are both enthusiastic and dutiful, the phrase 'as I expect you will remember' recurring frequently. Winchilsea came to Genoa from Nice with Loraine Smith and Doughty in November 1772, their journey by sea taking seven days and being most disagreeable. Winchilsea had intended to go to Turin, 'but travelling alone is so uncomfortable' that he decided to stay with Smith and Doughty; within a week they sailed for Leghorn, another dreadful seven-day voyage. He passed through Pisa to Florence where he had soon met Uguccioni, who had been his mother's admirer thirty years before and now paid avuncular attention to her son. Winchilsea was also grateful for the civilities paid him by Horace Mann, whose hypochondria amused him: 'I believe I never saw so fiddle faddle a man', he wrote; but he was pleased to observe that Mann attracted larger assemblies in his house than the French Ambassador, his only serious rival.  Winchilsea's attention to virtù was not informed ('I don't know enough') and he spoke no Italian (though he attempted to learn from an Italian master), but in December his self-confidence increased with his inclusion in the Tribuna (Windsor): Zoffany 'asked me to be in it which I am', he wrote triumphantly (28 Dec.). Six weeks later he reported 'I am they tell me the likest picture that was ever done' (16 Feb.), but then in March Zoffany rubbed out Winchilsea's head and did another, apparently in a different position. After one sitting for the second head Winchilsea wrote he didn't think 'it will be so like as ye first' (9 Mar.), and later he said that in everybody's judgment it was 'certainly not so like' and 'by a great deal' (17 Apr.). Florence exercised a hold over Winchilsea who had originally intended to leave in mid-January for Naples, like the majority of the fifty or sixty English visitors he had found there on his arrival. By mid-February there were only four of them left in Florence, the others being two Wilbrahams and Valentine Knightley. Winchilsea bought an enamel of the Madonna della sedia and began to go regularly to the Uffizi and he condemned the ignorance of 'about 9 tenths of the Women & 2 3rds of the Men [who] have never been in the Gallery' (16 Feb.). He clearly enjoyed the Carnival, even though the 'operas & Comedies and Dances are very bad' - not that that mattered 'as the Boxes are so many Conversations' (2 Jan.). By the time he left Florence, at the end of March, he had revised his opinions of the Tuscans; they were 'a very quiet good kind of people' (3 Apr.). His departure was delayed a week by ague but, accompanied by a German traveller, he reached Rome by 3 April 1773, in time for Holy Week.  By mid-April the Abbé Grant, who had 'exactly the appearance of an Italian Abbe', had taken him, with Felton Hervey, to an audience with the Pope, at which, as an officer and a Peer, Winchilsea wore his hat and sword (see Felton Hervey). The ceremonies of Holy Week led him to reflect on the contrast between rich and poor; 'I think we are very lucky in our having lost those Ideas or rather that the riches of the World are concentrated in no one Place' (26 Apr.). There were sixty-six English visitors in Rome at Easter who had almost all left by 26 April. Winchilsea stayed on, suffering from a recurrence of the ague; he had intended to sit to Batoni, but the master was too busy and he himself was now too yellow (17 Apr.). Winchilsea was attended, free of charge, by Dr Alexander Drummond with whom he had arranged to go to Naples.  They had arrived by 4 May when William Hamilton, whom Winchilsea had already met in Florence, had presented him at Court.2 On 11 May Winchilsea wrote an excited letter describing a voyage he was to take to Malta and Asia Minor with Drummond and the painter-antiquary James Clark, 'which I am quite in doubt whether you will approve or not', but the thought of travelling back to Vienna 'all alone through a climate which though it may be [a] very good one does not agree with me certainly, & in case of Illness very miserable accomodations', had led to his decision. While the boat was being prepared Winchilsea saw the sights, climbing Vesuvius and visiting Pompeii, where 'they employ so few workmen, that but little has been done' (25 May). Winchilsea's last letter is dated Naples, 25 May. He was then full of expectancy concerning the voyage, and Isaac Jamineau, the British consul, had lent him a copy of Sandys's Travels into Greece & Asia Minor in 1673. On 1 June 'Lord Winchilsea, Mr [Thomas] Dashwood, Mr Smyth Barry and Dr Drummond sail'd from this port [Naples] for the Archipelago and Constantinople in a British Merchant Vessel',3 calling first at Malta, Corfu, and Zante.4 Their voyage lasted nearly eighteen months and, of his travelling companions, Smith Barry was back in Italy by March 1775,5 but no more is heard of Winchilsea in Italy.
Mr Hewet & Mr Winder' offered their services to Burrell Massingberd in June 1717,1 and Samuel Winder duly acted as Massingberd's shipping agent.2 Thomas Winder died at Leghorn on 2 November 1733.3
The James Windham with William Fouquet at Venice on 5 September 1769,1 was presumably the 'Vindem' with 'Focchas' at Florence on 25 November 1769.2
On 17 April 1740 Stosch reported that Sir John Windham had returned to Rome from Naples 'a little time ago', and had visited the Pretender (SP 98/43, f.33; Walton, 17 Apr. 1740).

William Windham, a lively and accomplished young man, set out on his grand tour early in 1738 with his tutor (and second cousin) Benjamin Stillingfleet.1 His father had made an extensive grand tour in 1693-6 with a tutor Patrick St Clair, who had remained in the family's service, and much of William's tour is known only through the correspondence of St Clair with his father, half reminiscence and half anxiety.  Young William and Stillingfleet visited Paris and reached Geneva by April. They went on to Turin in October and were in Florence by the following February (1739). Thereafter their movements cannot be traced exactly, but it is known they were travelling with Robert Price of Foxley (whom they had met at Geneva), and that they were in Rome at Easter 1739, when 'Cavalle Werdam' and 'Cavlle Steuallefil' with Robert Price were staying at the Locanda of Marco Aurelio Celli in the parish of S.Lorenzo in Lucina.2 They went on to Naples and Venice before returning to Geneva in the spring of 1740.  But though his itinerary is vague, many of Windham's purchases in Rome remain prominent at Felbrigg. In October 1738 St Clair had urged Windham's father to allow him an additional £500, 'for no doubt he desires to lay it out in books, and pictures, and perhaps medals'. William acquired a number of Roman views-a series of six large oils and 26 gouaches by G.B. Busiri (dated 1739 and 1740) and two by P. Bianchi (who d. 1740)-besides some old masters; he gathered a large collection of engravings and bought many books on architecture and classical antiquities. Windham did not immediately return to England. At Geneva in 1740-1 he was a central figure in the group of high-spirited young travellers who formed 'The Common Room Set' (or 'The Bloods') indulging in theatricals, mountaineering and, in Windham's case, a marriage contract (later and expensively rescinded).
Obliged to go to Italy for the recovery of his health', he was, wrote Horace Walpole, 'young, but full of virtues, knowledge, and good sense'.1 He set out for Italy in November 1779,2 and by 3 January 1780 had met Horace Mann in Florence.3 But Walpole's warm recommendation did not ensure compatibility. 'He seldom calls on me', wrote Mann; 'he is very retired, and applies to the two languages, the want of which has made him decline being presented at Court or associating with the Italians' (31 Mar. 1780). 'Imbibed with the morose notions of his Spartan teachers,' Windham was critical of George III and his government; he had a certain 'sourness' of temper and, said Mann, 'if I am not mistaken he will go grumbling through Italy for want of amusement' (20 May). Windham had left Florence in April for Rome, where he had arrived by the 29th.4 He was at Milan in July, when he wrote to John Strange,5 indicating he had already been in Venice (his visit is further confirmed by an inscription on a copy of Cronaca Veneta Sacra e Profana [1777] at Felbrigg). He returned to England in September 1780.6
On 11 May 1726 Stosch reported that Sir Rowland and his governor Jack Serces[?] together with John Wynn ('son of Mr Thomas Winn MP') would be leaving Rome the next day 'to continue their journey'.1 A letter from Serces[?] to Katherine Winn, dated Geneva 8 May 1724, is in the Beinecke library (Osborn files).
Mr Baron Winne' came from Naples to Rome in March 1763.1 He was presumably the 'Baron Wynn' mentioned by William Rouet in May 1763 as having been ill at Naples.2

Conceivably the 'Winingarm' etched by Patch in 1770.

Winstanley was sent to Italy by the 10th Earl of Derby to acquire pictures for his country seat, Knowsley in Lancashire.1 He set out with his brother in July 1723 and they were in Rome by 2 November. Derby had given him a present for a Jacobite exile in Rome 'Me.M' ('a Virtusoso espetially in ye Antiques, & he has a good Collection of Drawings, but he complains yt very fine Pictures are too Dear for him'; 5 Nov. 1723), who was asked in return to assist Winstanley in his quest for pictures. 'M' advised Winstanley that 'the very finest things of all are not to be bought, being fixed in the Churches and Pallaces, Yet the Coppying of any of 'Em he thinks may be procured' (2 Nov. 1723). By 26 November he had begun a copy of Guido Reni's Aurora, 'about 3 yards long, & 4 foot broad', and he was also drawing 'Several Antique figures [for] my Lord Colerain' (22 Jan. 1724). Winstanley commented on the quality and availability of busts in Rome; 'their are severall of ye Modern ones yt are originalls, but I think the Coppys from ye Antique are much finer & better done. the antique things yt are to be sold now adays are very poor, and their Chief value is their antiquity' (26 Nov. 1723 OS). He commented on many pictures, including a Titian Judgment of Paris, 'very Small & Sadly abused by Cleaning' (27 Nov. 1723). On 22 January 1724 he wrote that the best things he had seen were The Seven Sacraments by Poussin, available for 20,000 crowns (now at Belvoir Castle, then pledged for 6,000 crowns by dal Pozzo). Between 1 October 1724 and 30 January 1725 Winstanley dispatched eighteen cases, of which sixteen contained sculpture and two paintings (including Winstanley's copy). Further consignments of paintings and sculpture were dispatched in July 1725, by which time Winstanley had returned to London. His last letter from Rome was dated 5 February 1725.
Samuel Winstanlg' stayed at the Tre Re hotel at Venice from 19 July to 3 August 1769.1 Oretti accompanied an Englishman, 'Samuelle Wicslandi', on an undated tour of Italy ('il giro della Italia'), returning to Bologna.2 Winstanley, 'about 50', and his 'young' nephew Rigby were at Nice between October 1770 and May 1771.3

Ralph Winter arrived in Rome with Charles Collyer in December 1779. He was, as John Coxe Hippisley observed, 'really a very good humoured fellow, as is his companion'.1 Thomas Jones, who had known Winter some years, accompanied them on their 'morning rambles' which generally ended with a bottle of wine and 'Mirth and good humour'. Jones wrote of Winter 'never was a man of his bulk more active and indefatigable, not a stone was left unturn'd ... It was in his Company that I first had the Courage to clamber up to the top of the Pantheon'. On 13 January Winter and Collyer went off for about a month to Naples, subsequently returning to Rome. On 14 March 'our Festive friend Mr Winter' left for Terni on his way to England.2 Winter was hoping to meet Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke) in Turin on his return journey.3


Following his part in the Jacobite rebellion of 1715, this unhappy Lord was described at his trial for treason as 'being in that doubtful state of memory, not insane enough to be within the protection of the law, not at the same time sane enough to do himself in the least respect any service whatever'.1 He had apparently first been in Italy in 1704, having left home after a quarrel, and was said to have been in Rome when his father died in 1704 (CP).  Following his trial he escaped to France in 1716 and joined the Pretender at Avignon. Thereafter he became an eccentric member of the exiled Jacobite court in Rome, living as best he could on the Pretender's bounty. In 1723 he was exiled to a distance of sixty miles from Rome after a quarrel with Lord Nithsdale. In August 1727 Bentinck found him reduced to living on a shilling a day after quarrelling with the court ('il s'est brouillé avec le Prétendant et toute la Cour'),2 and in 1740, having struck a blow in the presence of the Pretender, he was condemned to live in a small boarding house.3 He was a devoted Freemason, regularly attending the meetings of the Jacobite Lodge in Rome in 1735-7; as 'Great Master' he received Allan Ramsay and Alexander Cunyngham on 2 January 1737, and preserved the Lodge records after it had been prohibited by the Pope.4 He died in Rome on 19 December 1749 and was buried by the Pyramid of Cestius.5 His gaunt portrait in the dress of a Vatican official was painted by Cosmo Alexander (priv. coll. 1939). He was probably the George Seton who sat to Rosalba Carriera in Venice in November 17256 and who was with Thomas Hay and George Leslie in Padua on 1 December 1725.7
Wise was in Rome from December 1728 with Ingleby and Field, and left with them for Naples in April; on 15 May 1729 they left Rome for Venice.1 He was presumably the Matthew Wise whose Italian travel journal of 1728-9 (WSL) indicates the itinerary given above.
Wiseman was described by Charles Burney in 1770 as a 'worthy English music master', well known to all the English at Rome, 'where he has so long been an inhabitant, that he has almost forgot his native tongue'.1 A letter concerning music from 'Carlo Wiseman' to Edward Weld, dated Rome, 25 May 1763, is in fluent Italian.2 From at least 1764 he had lived in the Palazzo Rafaele, 'very pleasantly situated between the Villa Medici & Villa Borghese', which retained some of its original fresco decorations.3 He was presumably the Carlo Wiseman whose Sei Sonate a Violino e basso were published in 1738-41. In 1752 James Russel was buying music from Wiseman for Ralph Howard4 and Sir Watkin Williams Wynn paid him for music in 1768-9.5 On 18 November 1770 he was escorting Dr Burney1 and in September 1774 he was helping James Butler to hire Italian singers for the London Opera. There is a sad letter from Wiseman to Ozias Humphry, dated Rome 26 November 1776, in which he describes his assistance of the Royal Opera House in London for forty years, often at cost to himself.6 In April 1776 Patrick Home had attended concerts in Rome presided over by Wiseman.7 Mrs Elizabeth Banks told Humphry of Wiseman's death in a letter of 1 April 1778: Wiseman had left a wife who was ill and for whom a collection was being taken among the English in Rome.8
Wodehouse was in Toulouse in April 1763, about to proceed to Italy.1 'Woodhouse' was in Siena in December 1763 and in Rome the following May. His portrait by Batoni (Clark/ Bowron 268; Allen Memorial AM, Oberlin) was admired by James Martin in the artist's studio on 6 May, and the following day Wodehouse went about Rome with Martin, Lord Exeter, a Mr Chambers, the Abbé Grant and others.2 On 24 May 'Wourdhouse' was in Capua, returning to Rome from Naples,3 and in July Martin was admiring his bust by Nollekens in Rome.2 Wodehouse was then very ill, but had evidently recovered when Piccolomini wrote from Rome on 1 September 1764 introducing him to Horace Mann.4
Tomaso Wodhouse' arrived at Venice on 13 August 1770.1 He was doubtless the Thomas Wodehouse, a friend of William Constable, who was 'still' in Sicily in September 1771,2 and who stayed four months at Naples, as George Tierney told Constable in March 1772.3
A spirited Irish Jacobite, Wogan had escaped from Newgate gaol to France with his younger brother Nicholas in 1716. He came from Pesaro to Rome with Dominic Sheldon in the summer of 17171 and lodged with Lord Nithsdale.2 In November 1717 he was dispatched with the Duke of Ormonde 'wife hunting' for the Pretender; he was back with the Pretender at Urbino by 30 March 1718, having discovered the Polish Princess Clementina Sobieska at Ohlau.3 Wogan's great exploit was to bring her to Italy in 1719; she had been interned at Innsbruck by the Emperor at the demand of the British government, but Wogan, accompanied by Richard Gaydon, John Misset and Luke O'Toole, contrived her escape and brought her to Italy on 30 April.4 For this deed Wogan was made a Senator of Rome by the Pope on 13 June 1719, and a Baronet by the Pretender. On 1 September 1719 at Montefiascone he was a witness to the Pretender's full (as opposed to proxy) marriage.5 In November he was with his younger brother at Leghorn, about to go to Genoa with Forbes of Pitsligo,6 and then taking ship for Spain. By 3 June 1720 he was serving in Spain, where he spent the remainder of his life.
Nicholas had been in Italy with his older brother Charles in 1719, and had sailed with him to Spain at the close of 1719 (see Charles Wogan).  In January 1725 the Pretender recommended Nick Wogan to James Murray as 'a pretty young gentleman' who was about to leave Rome.1 He left for Venice on 28 January 1725 with Lucius Cary,2 and they arrived at Padua on 17 February with Simon Degge and Benjamin and Francis Lambert, having all been in Venice for the Carnival.3 By May 1726 Wogan was travelling in Italy with the Duke of Beaufort, with whom he stayed for almost a year, they being last recorded together at Padua on 28 March 1727 (see Henry, 3rd Duke of Beaufort).
Described by Stosch as 'a zealous Irish Jacobite', he had left Florence for Rome by 3 February 1738.1  In April Wogan, 'whose father was taken in the Preston rebellion' was at Naples.2



Wombwell and his tutor Divernois were in Naples by 29 December 1788; on 13 January 1789 Wombwell dined with Sir William Hamilton (Porter MSS).



Between at least 1738 and 1755 Robert Wood travelled extensively in Europe and the Middle East. While he is remembered for reading Homer in Asia Minor and becoming the principal instigator of English Hellenism, it was the subsequent publication of the ruins of Palmyra and Baalbec which brought him European fame. His visits to the more familiar territory of Italy were less momentous and are less well defined; two were incidental to his progress to the East, but he evidently spent many years in Rome where his interests encompassed both architecture and painting. Between 27 June and 15 July 1738 Robert Wood, listed as an Irishman and son of Alexander Wood, was received at Padua University as a doctor.1 He may have been the Mr Wood whom Richard Pococke had known in Italy in 1737. In May 1742 he sailed from Venice to Corfu, and later that year visited Mitylene and Scio; in 1743 he sailed from Latakia in Syria to Damietta in Egypt (DNB). By 1744 he had spent some time in Rome as secretary to Joseph Leeson, later 1st Earl of Milltown.  Four years later, in December 1749, Wood was back in Rome commissioning four paintings from Joseph Vernet (to be completed in the next eighteen months).2 He was then with John Bouverie and James Dawkins, with whom he had determined on a second voyage of exploration to the East. In May 1750, with an Italian draughtsman, G.B. Borra, they set sail from Naples. They met Stuart and Revett at Athens, but Bouverie died near Smyrna. Wood and Dawkins went on to Palmyra and Baalbec, their arrival subsequently celebrated in a huge canvas by Gavin Hamilton painted in 1757-8 (loan to Glasgow U.). Wood was back in England by September 17513 and in 1753 published The Ruins of Palmyra, followed in 1757 by The Ruins of Baalbec. Some of Borra's views in Naples made for Wood (besides many made during their expedition) are in a sketchbook belonging to the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic and Roman Studies in London.  In 1754 Wood accompanied the Duke of Bridgewater to Italy. In Rome he had the distinction of overawing even Robert Adam with his 'parade of learning', but he was received as a member of Adam's 'Caledonian Club' and talked much with him and Allan Ramsay.4 In the summer of 1755 Wood was considering an expedition to Sicily to study Greek remains, and he considerably upset Adam by proposing to take 'his' artist Clérisseau with him. Wood sat to both Mengs (priv. coll.) and Ramsay (NPG) in 1755, both heads suggestive of that 'superiority' which, said Adam, 'rather struck me with awe than infected me with ease'. Wood and Bridgewater left Rome in August 1755. In England in December 1756, as he prepared The Ruins of Baalbec for publication together with an essay on Homer, Wood was appointed under-secretary to William Pitt, and his later career became centred on politics.
In 1751 the 'ingenious' Abbé Wood was listed in the Pretender's household;1 in 1753 he was in a Jacobite hunting party at Montefortino.2
In August 1737 Captain Wood was about to settle in Dublin on half pay and an annuity. 'He has been Governor to Lord Jersey & many Gentlemen abroad,' wrote Edward Southwell, '& has Universally the best Character for that station of any man I ever heard of ... The Governt of Young men is now become a trade, & the Undertakers keep their Pupils in low company abroad, because they themselves are not admitted among the first Quality: I have always heard Capt Wood acted otherwise ...'.1 In a second letter Southwell said Wood had been in the 'Profession for ten Years past'; Southwell would have engaged Wood for his own brother had he not then 'happend to be retaind to Mr [William] Strode' with whom Wood had 'lately' returned [1733], having received £250 per annum, even though Strode was a younger brother; Wood was then requesting £300 per annum to accompany Sir John Rawdon.2  It is conceivable that he was also the George Wood who travelled with Lord George Douglas in 1723-4 and with Sir James Dashwood in 1734-5.
By January 1739 Mr Wood, 'an extremely good natured agreeable Fellow', was teaching the Pretender's younger son Henry to draw; he showed Samuel Crisp miniatures of both the Pretender's sons (Macnaghten, 2). Captain Wood was in Rome and Naples with John 'Warwick' Smith; he returned on his own from Naples after a short stay.1 'Capt. Wood' was listed in Florence on 2 May 1778.2
At Florence on 10 May 1796 the Wynne sisters visited Colonel and Mrs Woodburn; she seemed to be 'a Madcap' and her husband was in a poor state of health after spending much time in the Indies. On 30 March 1798 the Wynnes were obliged to attend an assembly held by Mrs Woodburn to console herself for her husband's departure (Wynne Diaries, 2:88, 212).

He was secretary to the British delegation at Turin and acted as chargé d'affaires between the departure of George, Lord Bristol, in August 1758 and the arrival of Mackenzie in November (Horn, 1:125).
Woodforde went to Rome to complete his studies in painting, Sir Richard Hoare (1st Bt.) offering him £100 per annum while he was abroad.1 He was in Rome by April 1786 when he went to Tivoli with Richard Colt Hoare, his patron's son, and that year he sent from Rome a Rustic Girl and a Landscape for exhibition at the RA. In September 1787 Father Thorpe described him copying Raphael in the Vatican and commended his talent and industry, and in January 1788 he noted that Woodforde, now painting original compositions, should have come sooner to Rome, and deserved to be encouraged.2 Copies by him of details from Poussin's Rape of the Sabines are at Stourhead and a sketch book with copies from Veronese's Family of Darius was on the London Art market in 1967. In September 1789 he was copying antiquities in the Uffizi.3 For his return to England in 1791 he joined Richard Colt Hoare (who had succeeded as 2nd Bt. in 1787) in Florence early in July and they rapidly crossed Germany, to reach Ostend twenty-four days later; on 2 August they were in London.4 Colt Hoare maintained Woodforde's allowance.  Samuel Woodforde may also have been in Naples by November 1787, see Thomas Greatorex.

Although he would have preferred to fight with his father's regiment in the imminent wars of the Spanish Succession, Lord Woodstock set out from The Hague on his grand tour in October 1701 with his tutor, the Huguenot historian Paul de Rapin.1 He found himself welcomed in Germany, but he was put out by the 'orgueil insupportable' of Vienna.  He spent seven months in Italy but his letters do not suggest he was particularly excited by the experience. He arrived in Venice in March 1702, having followed a precipitous route from Trent. He was not impressed with the Carnival but attended the opera and the theatre (he was to be a patron of the opera in London).2 His father then advised Woodstock to join Prince Eugene who was campaigning in Italy, but he was not keen to join a regiment of German soldiers and was, in any case, receiving innumerable courtesies from the Doge and Mocenigo, brother of the Venetian ambassador in London. He left Venice towards the end of March and came to Rome through Padua,3 Bologna and Loreto. It was Lent and he found Rome rather forlorn; 'Je n'ay encore vu personne de la Ville, à cause que tout le monde est en dévotion', he wrote on 15 April, and then discovered that Holy Week was little better, with overrated processions which required perpetual falling on one's knees each time the Pope passed. Rapin told Lord Portland (17 June) that Woodstock 'n'a pas eu ici beaucoup de plaisir, et n'y peut faire que des visites de Ceremonie, où tous les pas sont mesurés'. He exchanged visits with the Duke of Shrewsbury4 but, as he wrote on 29 April, 'L'on mene une vie fort retirée ici'; one had to look at quantities of antiquities, pictures and statues, and 'après cela il n'y a pas grand chose à faire'. He was unable to visit Naples, since war prevented him visiting any town with a Spanish garrison, and on leaving Rome in June he went to Florence and on to Venice in September. His tutor, who had been dull company ('depuis qu'il est parti de la Haye je ne l'ay pas vu de bonne humeur'), left him at Nuremberg in October, Woodstock returning on his own through Germany and reaching The Hague by May 1703.

Woodyeare lost both his parents in 1748 and was in possession of the family fortunes when he travelled to Italy in 1750 with William Drake (1723-1801), his tutor and first cousin. In Rome he sat to Batoni (Clark/Bowron 139; Minneapolis) for a portrait dated 1750, and he was caricatured by Reynolds in 1751 listening to Drake playing the flute (Providence, Rhode I.). He was probably the 'M. Woodicar' who commissioned six landscapes from Joseph Vernet to be completed in March 1752 (Lagrange, 334).
The 'John Godn Woolfe' at Padua on 1 November 1712 was evidently the J.G. Woolfe there on 4 December 1717 'per la seconda volta' (Brown 1414, 1559).
W. Woolfe' with the brothers Benjamin and Francis Lambert in February 1725 was presumably the 'Wolf' with John Elwood and Bateman in 1726/7.

As a boy Richard Worsley had spent nearly two years at Naples with his parents in 1765-7, and the 'short account' he then wrote anticipated the traveller he was to become. He returned on his own grand tour at the age of eighteen in 1769, with Edward Gibbon's friend D'Eyverdun as his tutor. They were only briefly in Italy. They arrived at Genoa on 20 October 1769 and went through Voltaggio and Alessandria to Turin which they left on 3 November, Sir Richard observing in his 'Cursory Account' that the Piedmontese were 'a very cunning and Polite People'. Thereafter he spent eight months in Lausanne.1 At the end of his tour Edward Gibbon, a close family friend, saw 'many alterations, and little improvement': Worsley spoke 'in short sentences, quotes Montaigne, seldom smiles, never laughs, drinks only Water, professes to command his passions, and intends to marry in five Months'.2  In 1783, the year after his celebrated divorce, Worsley again set out for the Continent, his prime purpose being to visit Greece and Asia Minor. Having spent time in Portugal, Spain and France he came to Genoa in October 1784. He passed quickly to Rome where he spent nearly four months, until February 1785. He visited many artists, including Carlo Labruzzi, Jacob More, Alexander Day, Angelica Kauffman and Philipp Hackert. From John Deare he commissioned a Marine Venus and he chose Reveley to accompany him on his 'intended tour through Greece & Egypt', to make 'drawings of Architecture, & the most interesting ruins'.3 For their journey through southern Italy to Taranto, see Reveley. Worsley spent two years in the East, mainly in Greece and on the Greek islands, but also visiting Constantinople and Cairo; he acquired at considerable expense an outstanding collection of ancient Greek sculpture, subsequently known and most elegantly published as the Museum Worsleianum [2 vols. 1794-1803].4 He returned to Rome on 4 April 1787 (although Reveley was apparently back in Rome by 10 September 1786). Between May and August he called several times on Vincenzo Pacetti from whom he bought further antiquities.5 On 30 September Worsley accepted election as an honorary member of the Accademia di S.Luca, his letter of acceptance written Dalla Villa Negroni.6 On 31 March 1788 he exported from Rome a number of ancient marbles, several specified as being from Athens.7 A letter from Flaxman, dated Rome 25 May 1788, suggests that Worsley was then still in Rome.8  In 1793 Worsley was appointed British resident at Venice. He arrived on 29 November and stayed in post until the collapse of the republic, leaving on 15 May 1797.9 Letters to him from Thomas Jenkins and Gavin Hamilton in Rome in May 1794 make it clear that he continued to collect.10 In May 1796 J.B.S. Morritt dined with Worsley, who 'showed us some very fine things in the way of sculpture and painting' and gave free access to his 'cabinet, which is very well worth seeing, and particularly rich in cameos and antique stones'.11 Lady Berwick, who was in Venice in December 1795, besides admiring Worsley's pictures and drawings, heard that he kept 'one very bad woman' with him.12
Worsley was first in Italy with his wife in 1752. They made an eighteen-month tour of the Continent, setting out from London in July 1751 and spending most of their time in France. Early in 1752 they sailed from Savona to Genoa and went on to Turin, arriving on 27 March; by 24 April they were in Cologne.1  They returned to Italy in 1765 with their two children, Henrietta (1758-91, who m. 1784 John Bridgman Simpson, later B. Bradford) and Richard (aged fourteen, see Sir Richard Worsley), whose 'short account' provides the itinerary.2 At Susa they met their old friend Edward Gibbon and from one of his letters it appears that Worsley had in mind the education of his children at Naples. It was not a good idea, thought Gibbon: 'Naples has no advantage but those of Climate and situation; and in point of expense and education for his children is the very last place in Italy I should have advised'.3 The Worsleys arrived in Florence on 26 May 1765 and were dining with Horace Mann on the 28th.4 They went straight on to Naples, where they spent nearly two years.  On 5 June 1766 Worsley set out on a six-week trip to Sicily; his journal of this tour is illustrated with full-page drawings and plans, and in another notebook he copied out Winckelmann's account of Herculaneum.5 He returned to Naples on 24 July. The family left Naples on 8 March 1767 returning to England through Rome, Florence and Venice, reaching London on 9 October 1767, 'after having been absent exactly two years, five Months and twenty Days'.
Worsley was in Florence with his uncle Frederick Frankland in December 1739. Frankland left for Rome in February1 while Worsley stayed until the summer (a message was sent for him in a letter of 4 June if he had not already left).2 Horace Walpole later remembered him at Florence having been the cicisbeo of the Countess Maria Anna Suares.3 Worsley made many annotated architectural drawings in the course of his tour (some of which remain at Hovingham while others are in the Avery Architectural Library of Columbia University) and he was responsible for the rebuilding of Hovingham in the 1750s.4


On 30 September 1771 James Byres wrote from Rome that Mr Worsley had just left, having returned from Naples; 'he neither recovers his flesh nor his strength ... and seems to have a sad Mussiness about him' (Byres letters MSS C).


Wraxall and Robert Manners left England together in 1777. Manners was then a cornet in the 3rd Regiment of Dragoon Guards and, just before they left England, his father obtained a similar commission for Wraxall.1 They were in Vienna in November 1778 and went on to Venice and Florence.2 In Florence they listened to Horace Mann on the demise of the Medici family and were acknowledged by the Young Pretender as they stood in their uniforms at the head of a private staircase in the theatre. They spent the summer of 1779 in Naples, Wraxall then beginning a life-long friendship with Sir William Hamilton. They left in June, and on 7 July reached Milan, where they were greeted by their old friends John Floyd and Lord Herbert (later 11th Earl of Pembroke).3 By the end of July they had apparently passed through Genoa to Turin (Collet from Genoa thanking Poyntz in Turin for recovering 'the three livres' from Manners).4 They were back in England by September,5 having passed through Brussels.
Little is known concerning Wray's visit to Italy,1 which followed his graduation from Cambridge in 1722. He is said to have spent six years there (1722-8) with the Hon. John King2 and James Douglas, a Cambridge contemporary (DNB).  Wray was in Padua on 20 March 1726 (without King or Douglas).3 His friend Thomas Edwards (a London barrister) addressed letters to him at Venice in January 1726, at Leghorn that spring, and at Rome in November (acknowledging Wray's description of Holy Week at Rome). Wray's profile medallion portrait, dated 1726, was cast in bronze by G.F. Pozzo in Rome, where Wray, Douglas and King met Arthur Pond and George Knapton. In 1727 Wray was in Turin.  Douglas was in Bologna on 13 April 1728 and Venice on 27 May, about to leave for Germany, apparently on his own,4 and in July 1728 five parcels (some containing earthenware and books) for Douglas were sent to England from Venice.5 In London Wray was a founder member of the Roman Club, others including George Knapton, John Dyer and Arthur Pond.
Son of a Jacobite sympathiser, Sir Bourchier made his grand tour in 1737-40. He was in Paris in 1737 and by October 1739 he had arrived in Genoa.1 At Easter 1740 he was living in the Strada delli Greci in Rome2 where, according to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, he slept with his landlady with the encouragement of his landlord.3 In August and September 1740 he was in Florence,4 where he was remembered by Horace Mann as 'that foolish knight of the united families, as he called himself, the Bourchiers and the Wreys, 'living with his cousin Countess nata Roles[?] ... and was too wise and solemn for anybody then'.5 In September he was staying in Milan, whence he made an excursion to Acqui to see his friend Joseph Spence.6 In the course of his tour he visited the engraver John Baptist Jackson in his studio at Venice.7
At Easter 1742 Wright was lodging with John Carmichael by the Piazza di Spagna in Rome.1 On 25 July he was reported as having been some time in Bologna with [William?] Annesley, and about to leave for Genoa.2 He was presumably the Wright who, early in June, having refused to give up his arms on entering Lucca, was imprisoned and then asked to leave the Republic.3

Formerly a Jacobite, Wright was forced to leave Rome early in 1729 due to Jacobite persecution.1 By 1731 he was acting as an agent for Francis Colman, the British resident at Florence.2 In mid-May 1737 he went with Lord Middlesex and William Ponsonby from Florence to Venice.3 In August 1737 in Florence he was killed in a drunken brawl over a game of cards by John Fotheringham, the autopsy describing him as 'd'Anni intorno a 50, corpulento molto, e d'alta statura e robusto'.4 He was also described at his death as a man 'de peu de reputation, depuis long tems en Italie et depuis un an toujours avec Lord Middlesex'.5


Most of Wright's years in Italy were spent in Venice, where he was first staying with his wife in December 1758. They were then observed by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who considered them 'a very agreeable English family', whose conversation was 'the greatest pleasure I have here'; she knew many of Wright's relations in England and Mrs Wright was 'Niece to Lord Westmorland. She is a very pretty, sensible young Woman'. They had stopped in Venice 'by her Lying in, unfortunately of a Dead child, But are preparing for Rome and Naples, and from thence design to return home', but this might not be for two years.1 It is not clear what happened in the next year, but the Wrights were next described by Lady Mary as leaving Venice towards the end of February 1760 with a Mr Stuart and Thomas Panton, 'intending for Rome and Naples'.2 In June 1760 Horace Mann obtained for them a ten-month passport to travel from Florence, where they had stayed some time, through Germany;3 they were in Venice in July.4 In the course of this visit Wright acquired works of art. James Adam told his brother Wright had made 'many purchases of pictures, prints, &ca here with but little taste',4 and in November 1760 Mann bought for him an intaglio with an Apollo (and sent him some seeds from a red-leaved ivy, which Wright had thought rare when he had seen it in the Boboli gardens in Florence).5  In 1766 Wright, who had been made a Knight of the Thistle, was appointed British resident at Venice. With Lady Wright he arrived at Turin on 2 September6 and reached Venice on 13 September.7 By the following March Lord Northington had requested that Wright (his nephew) should succeed to the first vacancy at Naples or Florence, intelligence which momentarily flustered Horace Mann until Wright assured him of his affection and loyalty and Lady Wright sent him a picture of the King 'of her own doing'.8 Ill health plagued both the Wrights at Venice; on 12 October 1768 Lord Kildare said Lady Wright's illness had prevented him from enjoying their good company, and on the 19th she was to receive for the first time after her illness.9  From August 1769 to August 1771 Wright was in England on sick leave (Robert Richie deputising for him in Venice).10 They returned for less than two years, finally leaving Venice in June 1773,7 and Sir James's appointment as resident was formally ended in September 1774.  It appears that Wright had continued to acquire works of art in Venice. In 1771 Matthew William Peters painted him there with his family (untraced) and copied a Venus by Titian from Wright's collection. Wright later gave John Skippe some Italian drawings, including a number by Venetian artists (Piazzetta, Rosalba Carriera and Veronese).11 But James Adams's allegation of Wright's lack of taste was apparently borne out when in 1799 'a miserable collection made up it is said by Sir James Wright' was sold at Christie's (24 Jun.).12 There was also a posthumous sale in 1804 (Christie's, 8-9 Jun.) which included 174 paintings.  The Wrights were again in Italy between 1790 and 1793, nursing their sick son, George, though it appears the parents were not always travelling together. Lady Wright came to Italy with Maria Cosway (née Hadfield) in 1790,13 and by December she was in Pisa with George and his tutor, a Mr Ireland. There she obtained lodgings for Lord Bruce and Thomas Brand, who thought her 'a Lioness'.14 By June 1791 Lady Wright and her son had been in Rome and had gone on to Naples, Lady Knight observing that George was 'a fine youth but in bad health'.15 They were still in Naples in December, George suffering from fits of asthma and a high fever.16 It was probably during this stay in Naples that George sat to Robert Fagan (the portrait now in the NGI). In the autumn of 1791 a 'Lady Rolle' was said to have come for a short time to Naples and Vietri with a Mr Ireland, 'who kindly read Latin' with the children of the Rev. Edward Taylor,17 probably a garbled reference to Lady Wright and her son's tutor.  On 12 December 1791 Sir James was in Rome,18 on his way to Naples. In February 1792 Sir William Hamilton was seeking permission for Wright to export from Naples a horse which he had bought for his son.19 Hamilton said the Wrights were then in Rome and about to leave, but Lady Knight was conversing with the 'very agreeable' Lady Wright in Rome in May.20 Early in September 1792 Sir James was in Venice with James Pinnock,21 while Lady Wright and her son were in Florence22 and did not come to Venice until April 1793. On 30 May she passed through Bassano on her way back to England.23 Sir James was made one of the executors of the painter Jacob More (who died in Rome on 1 October 1793), but it is not clear he was then in Rome.24

Wright, an obdurate man and a dedicated artist, was already established as a master of the 'candle-light' style when he set out for Italy in November 1773.1 His companions were his pregnant wife Hannah, his pupil Richard Hurleston, and John Downman, and for the last part of his journey he was joined by James Paine junior.2 They sailed for Italy on 1 November. They had reached Nice in December and went on to Genoa and Leghorn, before travelling overland to Rome, where they arrived on 3 February 1774. Wright and his wife had suffered much from the particularly turbulent sea voyage, the uncomfortable journey across country in a two-wheeled carriage, and poor accommodation en route. After a month in a house run by 'a very sensible old Lady who comes from Irland',3 they were established by 13 April 1774 in six rooms in a house in an elevated position, reached by steps (probably on the Trinita dei Monti). Wright found 'upwards of 40 English students' in Rome and during his stay he met George Romney and Ozias Humphry, as well as the landscape painter Jacob More (whose interest in night scenes he came to share). On 24 June his daughter was born in Rome.  Wright had taken with him to Italy an Alchymist discovering Phosphorus (Derby AG), painted in a northern Caravaggesque manner and, according to Father Thorpe,4 the Italians at first considered him merely as one of the 'modern mimicks of Flemish masters'. But by 10 August Wright was telling his brother Richard that 'My Pictures are in great estimation here I am shortly to be introduced to the Pope; & it is thought he will honour me with his Medal'. Clement XIV, however, was already mortally ill and the introduction never took place. Later that year Thorpe mentioned the completion of Wright's painting of The Captive from Sterne's Sentimental Journey (Vancouver) and, contradicting his earlier judgments, he said Wright 'is thought to have more genius than any of the great number of English painters in town'.  Wright was meanwhile overwhelmed by the antiquities of Rome. On 22 May 1774 he wrote that the Italian climate was 'certainly very salutary, and would, I think, perfectly restore me, was not my attention and application continually engaged with the amazing and stupendous remains of antiquity; and so numerous are they, that one can scarce move a foot but the relics of some stupendous works present themselves. When I consider the immense size of the whole, and the beauty of the parts, I cannot help reflecting how trifling and insignificant are the present operations of mankind: we are no better than infants, and ought to wear daiding strings. I have no time to enter into a particular detail of the fine things this country abounds with; let it suffice to tell you, at present, that the artist finds here whatever may facilitate and improve his studies. The Antique remains of art, as I said before, are wonderful'. Later, after visiting Pompeii, Herculaneum and the Museum in Naples, he wrote how he was glad 'to find from ye Observations I have made in these places that the present age is not so degenerated either in size or morals as some imagine. The Sculls of the Old Romans are the size of the present, and from the Chirurgical Instruments which are in the Museum, they were liable to the same disorders, indeed, there is no doubt but Nature was always ye same and will be so ad infinitum'. Wright told his brother Richard on 10 August 1774 that his time was 'entirely spent amongst the Antique Statues and Painting'.  He made many drawings (Derby AG, and a sketchbook in the BMPL dated February 1774), whose inscriptions reveal that he was working in the Capitoline Museum from mid-March to early April 1774, and in June 1774; in the French Academy in late April and May 1774 and the spring 1775; in a palazzo in Trastevere, probably the Palazzo Corsini or Farnesina, on 2 October 1774; in the Vatican at various dates, and at the Palazzo Barberini in March 1775.  His journal records his admiration for the works of Italian masters, such as Titian, Veronese and Correggio, though he sometimes criticized major pictures and found others too darkened to be appreciated. He passionately admired Michelangelo and drew many of the figures from the Sistine Chapel. A volume of thirty-six such drawings, inscribed Rome 1774, was recorded in 1885 (and some drawings now at Derby probably came from it). The Italian scenery and Mediterranean light also inspired him. He wrote to his sister Nancy on 22 May 1774 that 'The Natural scenes are beautiful and uncommon, with an atmosphere so pure and clear, that objects twenty miles distant seem not half the way'. Two sketchbooks (Metropolitan Mus., NY) contain a number of sky studies, some inscribed with notes of colour, light, cloud formations, and atmospheric effects, some dated May 1774.  It was during his visit to Naples (October-November 1774) that Wright saw 'the most wonderful sight in nature', a volcanic eruption of Mount Vesuvius. He told his brother he was going to paint it (11 Nov. 1774) and, in the event, drawings and paintings of Vesuvius formed part of his work for the next two decades. Wright found an ideal subject to pair with Vesuvius: the Girandola display at Castel Sant' Angelo in Rome, and he subsequently exhibited paired paintings of the two subjects (for example, pendants from 1778 are in the Hermitage and Pushkin Museums). Before leaving Naples Wright also painted two cavern scenes near Salerno (dated 1774; priv. coll. and Smith Coll., Northampton, Mass.).  Wright is said to have contributed to Sir William Hamilton's Campi Phlegraei [1772], according to an inscription in Hamilton's own copy (now BL), and later, in 1784, Wright is said to have used a drawing by Charles Parker as the basis for a painting of a scene described in Hamilton's Account of the late Earthquakes in Calabria, Sicily [1783].5 Wright must have met Hamilton in Naples,6 but he is not known to have visited Sicily (although he produced at least two Sicilian views, one in the Tate Gallery).  Wright left Rome on 10 June 1775, several months later than he had intended. He spent only a fortnight in Florence, and a week in Venice; 'when one has seen Rome, other places suffer by comparison', he explained in his journal. But he had time to meet J.S. Copley in Parma and to admire the Royal collection in Turin.
A Jacobite doctor in Italy, he had attended James Murray (the Jacobite Earl of Dunbar) at Spoleto in February 1721.1 In 1722 Stosch described him as physician to the Pretender,2 in which office he was joined by Dr James Irwin by 1736. Allan Ramsay saw 'Dr Wright and Dr Irvine, the Chevaliers alias the Pretenders two Physicians' in Rome in November 1736.3 Lumisden said that Wright died soon after Irwin (who d. in 1759).4

Wroughton was at Nice in December 1784 and at Rome on 18 March 1785.1 On 29 May he was presented at Court in Turin with Lord Downe.2

Richard Bagot of Blithfield, secretary to Lord Northampton's embassy to Venice, appears to have offered, or agreed, to take Wyatt with him, indicating Wyatt's arrival in Venice in October 1762 (see Bagot). Wyatt is said to have spent two years in Venice, where he was the pupil of Antonio Visentini, before moving to Rome (although Hayward said Wyatt arrived in Rome in November 1767).1 He acquired a reputation in Rome with his measured drawings of the dome of St Peter's, made while suspended on a ladder 'over a frightful void of 300 feet'; he returned to England in or about 1768 (DBA). Father Thorpe later wrote that Wyatt 'was esteemed to have the best talents for Architecture of any of our countrymen, who for several years have been in Rome'.2


Wycombe had travelled extensively in northern Europe between 1784 and 1789 and again in 1793. Carefully groomed by his father for a political career, he was growing to resent this fussy supervision1 by the time he came to Italy. Although he spent some time there with the American traveller Allen Smith,2 for the next two and a half years he was principally occupied by the company of Lord Holland and the pursuit of Mrs Wyndham, the estranged wife of William Frederick Wyndham, the British envoy at Florence. A portrait of Wycombe by F.-X. Fabre dated 1793 (untraced) was presumably painted in Florence,3 but Wycombe is not otherwise recorded in Italy that year. He was in Venice from 21 to 26 June 1794, and made a short trip to Istria, returning to Venice on 14 July.4 According to Lady Webster's journal, Wycombe had arrived in Florence soon after 12 June [July?], Lord Holland having coming down from Venice to await his arrival.5  Lady Webster then found him 'a very eccentric person', whose actions she hoped were 'directly opposite to his sentiments; if not he must be a scourge;' his conversation was 'grand and declamatory, his humour excellent,' and he was very galant, beginning 'by making love equally to me and Mrs Wyndham'. Wycombe had intended to visit the Isle of Elba with Lord Holland but 'they had not found a favourable wind', and Lady Webster met them again at Pisa (where Wycombe read her an ingenious sonnet he had just composed). In October 1794 Wycombe and Holland went off to Rome and Naples, where William Hamilton met them; on 28 October he wrote that they were returning to Rome 'next week'.6 Early in November they had returned to Florence from Rome.  In the summer of 1795 Wycombe and Holland came to stay near Lucca, spending time each day with Lady Webster7 and amusing themselves, according to Lady Berwick, 'with no other conversation than turning to ridicule religion and Government'.8 Amongst their amusements was being painted by Gauffier, whose portrait of Wycombe, dated 1795, remains in a private collection. Wycombe came to Rome in the autumn and was a torch-bearer at James Durno's funeral in September.9 On 22 November he was at Bologna meeting Lady Webster and Mrs Wyndham,10 who were intending to go to Turin 'if it should be safe'.8 Lady Webster's husband had returned to England in May and Mrs Wyndham had separated from hers by December. Lord Holland and Lord Wycombe were now their escorts, talking and acting, commented Lady Knight, 'as their convenience directs'.11 By February 1796 Wycombe and Mrs Wyndham were living together at 'Mr Trevors Inn' at Turin [i.e. John Trevor, the British envoy], beginning to tire of each other's company; 'she talked of crossing the mountains going to England, he of going to any where else. he says he is quite tired of her & she sees it', wrote Lady Berwick: 'I now hear she is coming here [Milan] in order to go by the Tirol next month'.12 Wycombe returned to England in January 1797, to hear his father's criticisms of his behaviour abroad, but he appears to have stayed some time longer with Mrs Wyndham. In December 1800 he had to return to Florence to procure a witness in a civil action which Wyndham unsuccessfully brought against him.
Three days ago one Dominick Wyer a relation of Sir Daniel Wyers in the Great Duke's service arrived at Leghorn and then departed for Rome (SP 98/34; Skinner, 21 Nov. 1733).
Charles Wyndham left England in 1727 with his tutor, a Mr Campbell, first spending two years at an academy in Paris. He left Paris for Lyons with Benjamin Bathurst in September 1729,1 while Campbell (having met up with Lady Ferrers) alleged that he was too ill to travel and stayed on in Paris. Tutor and charge met at Lyons, and then early in November in Turin.1 There Wyndham attended a Ball given by the French Ambassador to celebrate the birth of the Dauphin and danced 'all night long' with the Princess Francavilla (16 Nov. 1729). He had met George Lyttelton in Lyons2 with whom he then visited Genoa and Milan (9 Dec. 1729), and by the end of December they were among a number of English tourists ('about thirty') enjoying the Carnival in Venice. He saw the celebrated singer Farinelli, 'the greatest prodigy in the world', and told his father that Mr Brown [Neil Brown, the British consul at Venice] 'claims an old acquaintance with you' (6 Jan. 1730).3  He met Campbell and Lady Ferrers again in Venice and told his father of his own bewilderment at their behaviour; he also explained that he was very shortly leaving for Rome and, 'as soon as the Carnival is over there I propose to make a trip for four or five days to Naples, & then return for the holy week after which according to your desires & commands I will make the best of my way homewards'; he gives his address in Rome as 'chez Monsieur Jean Ange Belloni Banquier' (28 Jan. 1730). He was detained in Venice and Lyttleton departed on his own on 12 February. They were again together in Rome in March, at the time of the Conclave and Wyndham, finding Campbell still attached to Lady Ferrers, proposed to return home with Bathurst (8 Mar. 1730). He may have been the 'Carlo Vinder' listed as living by the Strada della Croce in Rome at Easter 1730 with a 'Gugliemo Russel/Russet'[?].4  On 13 April 1730 he told his father from Rome that he had broken with Campbell, that he was taking 'all precautions' to avoid the Pretender and his court, and that he was leaving that day for Naples 'where after five days stay, I shall return [to Rome] to prepare for moving homewards by Florence'. He had left Rome on his return journey by 4 May when Stosch reported him 'much attached to King and government'.5 On 19 May Colman in Florence reported that 'Mr Lyttelton set out last Monday for Paris in company with Mr Wyndham'.6
Henry Penruddocke Wyndham, known as Pen, travelled to Italy with Joseph Windham of Earsham and William Benson Earle of Salisbury. They took their own post-coach, 'in every way superior to the travelling vehicles on the continent'.1 They travelled across France in two months, then sailed from Antibes for Leghorn via Genoa. But the weather was awful and progress slow, so that Joseph Windham and Earle set out on mules from Ventimiglia to Genoa, while Wyndham and Earle's servant walked to San Remo and rejoined the felucca. They all met at Genoa on 24 November. Their journey from Sestri to Lerici was made on foot and then by mule. The felucca landed their coach at Lerici and they then drove to Pisa, where they met Edward Wortley Montagu and Pen measured the leaning tower. At Siena Pen found the cathedral 'rather gawdy and affected than elegant and fine'. From Viterbo they were escorted by three Papal soldiers as protection against banditti and they reached Rome on 29 December.  They lodged with an Irishman in the Piazza di Spagna for seven guineas a month. Three days after their arrival the Pretender died and Pen attended the funeral ceremonies. He met Lord Hillsborough, Lord Tylney, Laurence Sterne and Peter Beckford, and encountered an exiled [John] Wyndham now a barber; but Pen was careful to avoid too much association with his countrymen lest 'the ends of the travel should be lost'. On 3 April Pen and Earle left for Naples, leaving Joseph Windham in Rome studying antiquities. Joseph 'studied and measured the remains of ancient Architecture there, particularly the Baths, with a precision which would have done honour to the most able professional Architect', and his drawings were later engraved for Cameron's Baths of the Romans Explained [1775].2 Before he left Rome Pen sold their coach at a £3 profit to Lord Tylney (who sold it to a Spanish grandee at a £45 profit) and he proceded by vetturino to Naples.  Within a day of their arrival William Hamilton was introducing them to Neapolitan society, but Pen found conversazioni 'jolly groanings' and was not much amused. He was shown the museum at Portici, was presented to the King and dined with the chief minister, Bernardo Tanucci. On 5 June he sailed to Sicily: he climbed Mount Etna and enjoyed 'a week of idleness, madness, and folly' during the Feast of S. Rosalia at Palermo. He returned to Naples on 23 July and soon after was pleased to leave 'the horrid Neapolitans - devils incarnate inhabiting an earthly paradise'.  They stayed in Rome, reunited with Joseph Windham, until 10 December, then set out for Florence without Joseph, who stayed on in Rome. Amongst the architectural drawings Pen acquired in Italy was one of the entrance to St Peter's by Piranesi dated 31 December 1769 [sic] and inscribed: 'Piranesi Drawn at Rome in the presence of Joseph Windham Esqr'.2 At Spoleto Pen measured the acqueduct and found Joseph Addison (in his Remarks) to have been at fault. They passed two months in Florence, Pen having an adventure with an heiress (and his father in Salisbury marking Pen's relevant letters 'not to be showed'). They passed a month in Bologna and then travelled up the Adriatic coast to Venice.3 Pen did not like it; 'one may call it a large prison, and I shall be happy when I am once again on terra firma. At present I fancy myself on board a large fleet in a dead calm'; he even thought the gondolas were like hearses. They left Venice on 10 June and went on to Turin through Padua, Vicenza, Verona and Parma and on 8 July began their crossing of the Alps. Pen's tour had cost about £450; he had sent home a crate of books from Naples and seven boxes from Rome (some belonging to Joseph Windham) and another box from Venice.
Cav.Wyndham' was wanting to export six mules from Naples in March 1785, and 'Giacomo Wyndam' was seeking permission to hold a concert in the via Ripetta in Rome in August (ASN E 683. ASR TF, b.2139).
At Rome early in 1766 Henry Penruddocke Wyndham met a young barber called Wyndham who alleged that his father, John Wyndham, had come to Rome soon after 1735, married a Roman and had seven sons, of whom the barber was one. John Wyndham had lived abroad since 1714 and in 1735 had returned to England expecting to benefit from a deceased uncle (William Wyndham); disappointed, he had come to Italy (H.A. Wyndham, Family History 1688-1837, 201-2).


Apparently a cousin of Henry Penruddocke Wyndham, he was an officer serving at Minorca with the 67th Foot in 1766. In the spring of that year Wadham Wyndham was returning to Minorca from Switzerland via Turin.1 Two of his letters from Turin, written in 1766, are in the Somerset RO (dd/wy bx254).

When Wyndham was appointed envoy extraordinary to the Tuscan Court in Florence in succession to the unsatisfactory John, Lord Hervey, he had already the reputation of being a difficult and radical character.1 'Ce petit polisson, ce petit jacobin', Lady Webster called him, observing how all the English in Brussels had been pleased to ignore him in 1792. Soon after his arrival at Florence on 20 March 17942 John Carr wrote that Wyndham had 'had an affair with a Florentine Count [Carletti] on account of his Jacobinical principles, which tho' it is likely to end without bloodshed has injured him in the opinion of the people of the place'.3 Wyndham had, however, been instructed always to use 'conciliatory but firm' language; Tuscany was traditionally a neutral state, but France and England were tempted to win her active support.  In June 1796 the French invaded Leghorn, a British trading station, but not before Wyndham had contrived for the British merchants to sail off to Elba with much of their stock. In August 1796 Wyndham went to Naples in a vain attempt to raise Neapolitan support against the French; his dash through Rome on 16 August was noticed by J.M. Gandy, as was his return through Rome on the 27th4 (but on 10 September the Diario Ordinario reported that 'Lord Frederico Nyndham, Ministro d'Inghilterra alla Corte Toscana' had arrived in Rome from Florence on 1 September and after staying a few days had left for Naples). In May 1797 the French withdrew from Leghorn and the British returned.  The French again invaded in January 1799, but withdrew after a week. The final occupation came in March, at which point Wyndham withdrew, embarking from Leghorn on 12 April for Palermo. In June there was an armed counter-revolution which started in Arezzo, and Wyndham returned to Tuscany to follow its progress. On 9 July 1799 the insurgents made their triumphal entry into Florence, led by Lorenzo Mari, an officer in the Grand Ducal Guards, followed by his wife and Wyndham, who was then her lover. In May 1800 the French finally overran Tuscany and Wyndham made his escape from Ancona, joining the exiled Tuscan government in Vienna until his retirement in 1807. Wyndham's private life had also been eventful. He had come to Florence in 1794 with his first wife Frances and their eight-year-old son (George Francis, 1785-1845, who became the 4th Earl of Egremont), and a second son was born in Florence in July 1794. But by August 1795 the Wyndhams had decided to part, Lady Plymouth then observing that Wyndham was diminishing his establishment to that of a bachelor, and that they had been 'much estranged from each other'.5 Mrs Wyndham, the illegitimate daughter of Lord Baltimore, had already had an unsuccessful first marriage. Lady Webster, herself unhappily married, became her confidante and in 1794-5 they shared a somewhat emancipated and exciting life together.6 In October Lord Amherst 'fell in love with' both of them; and at Lucca Wyndham came to have 'a serious eclat' with his wife. According to Lady Webster, Mrs Wyndham then 'behaved romantically, and what in a novel would be called feelingly delicate, but like a very silly person for her worldly concerns. She is determined to separate and quit him'. At Lucca again in 1795 Wyndham ignored Lady Webster; in November Mrs Wyndham was travelling to Turin, followed, or pursued, by Lord Wycombe with whom she was living in Turin in February 1796 (though Wycombe was by then 'quite tired of her').7  By this time however Alessandrina Mari was Wyndham's mistress. She was to be made a Baroness of the Austrian Empire for her part in the uprising of 1799, and for his part Wyndham was elevated to British minister plenipotentiary. A second mistress was Julia Konstancia (widow of the Polish Count Spyterki), by whom he had a son (later a Major General in the Indian army) and whom he was to marry after the death of his first wife in 1822.


His father had died before he was two years old and, on leaving Oxford in May 1768, Sir Watkin set out for Italy with a friend of his own age, Captain Edward Hamilton, and an older man Thomas Apperley, a neighbour from Plas Grono who had also been at Oriel College. Though his first impressions of Italy seem to have been less than enthusiastic, Sir Watkin dispensed patronage on a lavish scale and returned home with the reputation of a Welsh Maecenas.1 The accounts of the tour, kept by Samuel Sidebotham, provide a wealth of detail concerning the itinerary and expenditure; thus at Naples on 17 December successive and poignant entries read 'I gave towards burying an Old Woman' and 'Pd for a Gold Snuff Box'.2  Sir Watkin's party was joined in Paris by the valet Antonio Carrara, whom Garrick had brought back from Italy in 1765, and there are regular payments to Hamilton, Apperley, Carrara and a Mr Morris in the accounts. They arrived in Turin on 19 August and passed on to Genoa and Milan, where Sir Watkin wrote to his steward, 'I own I had rather be in old England than where I am. All this fuss of being presented first at one court, & then at another does not please me much'.3 But in mid-September he went with Hamilton and Lord Kildare to Lake Maggiore which Kildare, at least, found 'beyond description'.4 After passing through Bologna, they came to Florence where they stayed at Hadfield's. Sir Watkin's largesse first became evident on the occasion of the investiture of Horace Mann as a Knight of the Bath; he had attended Mann's grand dinner on 21 October and then four days later he gave a great dinner himself at Hadfield's country residence, the Palazzo Bruciato,5 'followed by a great concert of music and a ball in the evening'. Mann felt particularly obliged to Sir Watkin, whom he had not known 'till a few days ago'.6 Sir Watkin, Hamilton, Apperley and Carrara appeared in a caricature group by Thomas Patch (untraced), who also introduced Sir Watkin in another with Lord Berkeley and Lord Beauchamp (WSL), and etched Sir Watkin's head (making him appear grossly overweight). Sir Watkin bought works from the sculptor Francis Harwood (some vases, a chequer table of all sorts of Marble, and twelve pieces of marble made like books), while Lamberto Gori promised him two scagliola tables within seven months (26 Oct.). In two weeks at Florence Sir Watkin had spent over £600, including a donation of £100 to Boswell's appeal on behalf of 'the Brave Corsicans'. They spent a week travelling through Pisa, Leghorn and Siena to Rome where they arrived early in November. Again Sir Watkin sounded despondent 'the more of this Country I see, the more I prefer my own',7 but he appears to have overcome his indifference in the course of his six-week residence at Benedetto's.  He acquired a drawing master, James Forrester, while the Anglo-Italian Charles [Carlo] Wiseman attended his musical interests. He was in Rome at the same time as the 5th Duke of Devonshire; they went to Tivoli together on 15 November and shared a course of antiquities under James Byres, who duly profited by the association. He sold Sir Watkin over £1000 worth of works of art (two cameos, a ring, prints etc. and nine pictures are listed in the disbursements; 3 Dec. 1768 and 7 Jan. 1769), besides receiving a commission to design a new house for him at Wynnstay (his designs were not executed).8 Thomas Jenkins sold him eight pictures, two marble statues and an intaglio (7 Jan. 1769, £200) and Gavin Hamilton five pictures (ibid., £350). Nor did Sir Watkin neglect contemporary art. He sat to Hewetson for his bust in terracotta (dated 1769; NGI; 'bust in clay of Sr Watkin & some Casts from it'; 7 Jan. 1769), and he commissioned a landscape from Hugh Dean (18 Jul. 1769), besides a copy from Raphael by Maron (ibid.), and a set of Piranesi's etchings. But his most celebrated commissions were those he gave to Batoni - the portrait of himself with Apperley and Hamilton, all full-length figures (NMW; Clark/Bowron 347), and a history piece; initial payments were made for the former on 3 December 1768 and for the latter on 6 January 1769, but Batoni took his time and the portrait was still in Rome in April 1772, while the history piece, which became Bacchus and Ariadne (priv. coll. Italy; Clark/Bowron 353), was not finished until 1774.9 From Mengs, who was then in Spain, Sir Watkin left a commission for a Perseus and Andromeda; Byres was probably the agent, but the picture was not finished until 1778 (it was then captured at sea and is now at St Petersburg).10  From Rome they went on to Naples where they stayed three weeks at Stephano's. The Wynn accounts record visits to the surrounding sights, and Sir Watkin embarked on a lifelong friendship with William Hamilton (from whom he acquired the first two volumes of d'Hancarville's Antiquités Etrusques, Grecques et Romaines). They were back in Rome for the New Year and during this brief second visit Sir Watkin became involved in a fracas with the painter James Barry, who alleged that Byres, Forrester, Dean and Hewetson were preventing him from enjoying Sir Watkin's patronage.11 On 7 January Sir Watkin paid the Abbé Grant for a fan-mount. The next day they set out for Venice where they arrived on 15 January. The last pictures purchased by Sir Watkin were '2 small Pictures of Titian's at Padua' on 20 January, which at 63 lires were presumably less remarkable than most of his other acquisitions. On 15 February Sir Watkin and his party were back in London.


The eldest child of Richard Wynne and Anna Gazzini, Giustiniana was born (out of wedlock) in Venice.1 A great beauty, she was the lover of Casanova (whom she first met in Paris when she was fifteen) and at eighteen she was the mistress of the antiquary Andrea Memmo, by whom she had a child (while being courted by the eighty-year-old Joseph Smith). In 1761 she married the seventy-year-old Count Rosenberg (d. 1765), the Austrian Ambassador at Venice with whom she moved to Klagenfurt in 1764.  When she returned to Venice in 1770 she became a writer and an antiquarian. Her first publication as la Comtesse des Ursins et de Rosenberg was an account of the visit of the Count and Countess du Nord [the Tsar Paul I and his wife] to Venice in January 1782 addressed to her brother Richard (1744-98); in 1787 she published Alticchiero, the description of the antiquary Angelo Querini's house outside Padua.
The Wynne brothers, Richard and William, came together to Italy in 1729. They were in Padua on 6 December with their governor the well-travelled Dr James Hay.1 The three arrived in Rome on 14 February 1730, Stosch then remarking on Hay 'the celebrated Jacobite Scotchman'. On 2 November Stosch wrote that the Wynnes and Hay 'have returned to Rome, with the Chevalier Morton [Sir Robert Myrton]'.2 It seems that William (the younger brother) returned home soon after, while Richard stayed on in Venice. On 21 March 1732 Sir Robert Myrton, 'Mr Wynne and Doctor Hay' were in Venice designing 'to stay till after the Ascension'.3  On 22 May 1733 Elizeus Burges listed a Mr Wynne at Venice,4 and then in June 1734 Richard Pococke explained that 'Mr Wynne elder brother of Wynne Gentm. Commoner of C.C.C. in my time [i.e. William Wynne] who took his brother to travel with him has been two or three years at Venice enchanted with a mistress'.5
Following the death of his first wife in 1734, Wynne came to Venice, where he found solace with one Anna Gazzini who became his mistress. Their eldest child, Giustiniana, was baptised in 1737 and they had three daughters by the time they married in Venice in 1740, and two sons thereafter.1 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu said Wynne was alleged to be worth £1200 or £2000 per annum and had been introduced to his Greek wife 'by his Gondolier (who are as industrious as the Drawers of London)'; on his death in 1751 he left the girls £1500 each.2  Giustiniana and his two sons, Richard and William are separately noticed; his other daughters were Mary Elizabeth (b. 1741) and Teresa Susanna (b. 1742). Mrs Wynne took her three daughters to England in 1751-2 to settle the inheritance and on their return they settled in a house 'next to the Palazzo Tiepolo, at the Tragetta de la Madonetta'. They returned to England in 1758-60, before settling in Padua. (In 1769 Dr Burney nentioned a Cassandra Wynne playing the harpsichord in Venice,3 possibly a reference to one of the daughters.)
Having been brought up in Venice, where his father had died when he was six, Richard was taken to England in 1751 and again in 1759 when he appears to have stayed until 1788.1 He then sold the family estate at Falkingham and returned to Venice and the Veneto with his family - an ailing wife and five daughters. He was to stay abroad until 1798, his movements between Italy, Switzerland and Germany principally determined by the progress of the French armies. The family's fortunes on the Continent were described in the youthful diaries kept by his second and third daughters, Elizabeth (Betsey) and Eugenia.  For two years they moved between Venice, Padua, Conegliano and Treviso. He was presumably the 'Ricardo Cavaliere Wynne con la sua Consorte e figli' who had arrived at Venice on 13 Mar. 1790.2 For Richard Wynne this was simply a return home to his three sisters, Giustiniana, Mary Elizabeth and Teresa, their families and numerous relations. His eldest daughter, Mary, married Francesco Montalbano early in 1789. In October 1791 they left Italy to spend nearly five years in Switzerland and Germany. Anticipating danger from the French armies, Richard Wynne, who appears in the diaries as a somewhat restless and gouty man, took his family from Ratisbon to Italy in March 1796. On 17 March they reached Verona where they met the exiled Comte de Provence (later Louis XVIII) and Betsey, then seventeen, gave a harpsichord recital for him. In April they reached Florence, but on 9 May Betsey was writing 'we begun to be very uneasy as the duced French make such progress'. On 14 June her father got 'thoroughly drunk' while discussing the best procedures with William Wyndham, the British envoy. The French were at Bologna on 20 June and on the 22nd the Wynne family went to Leghorn; 'God knows what will become of us at last', Betsey reflected. On 24 June they boarded the frigate Inconstant (Captain Thomas Fremantle) and on the 26th (as the French entered Leghorn) they sailed to the Isle of Elba. Betsey promptly fell in love with Fremantle who gave her a ring before leaving the family on 14 July. The Wynnes remained on Elba where on 11 September Betsey wrote of her father, 'it is high time he should return to England and settle himself for ever there'. Then Fremantle returned in December and advised them to sail with him to Naples, which they did, arriving on 8 January 1797.  Betsey and Fremantle were married in the Hamiltons' house on 12 January. Prince Augustus gave her away and Sir William Hamilton, Sir Gilbert Elliot and William Lambton attended. On 17 January Captain and Mrs Fremantle departed for their honeymoon at sea, and were back in Portsmouth by 2 September.  The rest of the Wynne family stayed in Naples. Richard Wynne was now suffering from gout and when they went to Caserta he travelled with 'a full draped coat, sword and bag, one foot elegantly shoed t'other in a woolen slipper' (9 Feb. 1797). They eventually sailed from Naples on 6 March 1798 and came home via Leghorn, Florence, Bologna, Padua and Verona, Eugenia noting that 'Everywhere we found traces of the fury of the French: demolished houses, profaned altars and the hatred and fear of them still living in every heart' (10 Apr. 1798). They were in England in May. Richard Wynne died at Bath in October 1798, his wife in London in November 1799. In October 1815 Betsey returned to Italy to join her husband, by then Admiral Fremantle, who was to die at Naples in December 1719.

Like his brother Richard, William was brought up in Venice, returning to England only to complete his education at Oxford. He appears to have returned to Venice, though little is known of his life until he came back to England in 1800 to take possession of his deceased brother's estate.1 He was probably the 'Gugliemo Wine' at Venice on 15 August 1763,2 and conceivably the William Wynne, son of Richard, who received a doctorate (lauream in Philosophia et medicina) from Padua University on 6 March 1771.3


Yarde was in Rome with Captain Cole on 7 April 1729 and died at Leghorn on 22 September leaving debts in Italy; his body was to be sent to England (SP 85/16; Walton, 7 Apr., 6 Oct. 1729. SP 98/26; Skinner, 24 Sep. 1729).

He was secretary at the British legation in Turin in 1753 and chargé d'affaires in the absence of Lord Rochford between 25 January and 17 June 1753.1 An enclosure for 'Mr Yonge' was sent by Rochford in Turin to Horace Mann in Florence on 12 September 1753, with instructions that if Yonge had already left it should go to Rome, care of the banker Belloni.1 In Rome in November Yonge informed Cardinal Albani of a quarrel among some young English visitors.2
Edward, Duke of York, younger brother of George III, was not unduly gifted. At the age of twenty-five, when he went to Italy, he was a sociable, pleasure-seeking young man, quite without intellectual pretence, and the King was happy to have him abroad. He was the first member of the Royal family to go to Italy as a tourist and his visit gave rise to much diplomatic activity from the moment it was announced in the London Chronicle on 18 June 1763. But Horace Mann quickly recognised that the Duke's journey might be rather more than just 'a party of pleasure and curiosity'. In Europe the Seven Years War was only just concluded and in Rome the Pope still regarded the Jacobite court as that of the exiled British King. The Anglophile Cardinal Albani at once urged that the Duke should visit Clement XIII.1 In Lombardy the Austrian rulers, losers in the recent war and without diplomatic relations with Britain, were anxious to receive the Duke in Milan. The tour was to be regularly reported in London (particularly by the London Gazette and London Chronicle) and these accounts were separately published in London in 1764 as the Tour of His Royal Highness Edward Duke of York (on which this account is largely based). The Duke, attended by Colonel Henry St John and Sir William Boothby, travelled in Italy under the alias of the Earl of Ulster, though he was invariably treated according to his proper rank.  The tour started in Genoa, where the Duke stayed with the British consul, James Holford. There was a full programme of sight-seeing and formal entertainment during his ten-week residence, but the French believed the Duke was staying on to influence negotiations over the sovereignty of Corsica.2 The truth was less subtle, for the Duke was evidently detained by the charms of Madame Durazzo (Angela Serra), an amateur painter3 with whom, on Christmas Day, he appeared hand in hand in the Palazzo Ducale, where the Genoese nobility had assembled to greet the Doge. The Duke arrived in Turin on 12 February 1764, his route facilitated by the building of a special bridge across the Bormida.4 He lodged next door to the British envoy, George Pitt, and was quickly introduced to the King of Sardinia (Piedmont and Sardinia were then the only allies of Britain in Italy). Turin was not renowned for its amusements, but the Duke toured the city and attended numerous concerts and balls, and hunts at Stupinigi. He also witnessed the scientific experiments of the Abbate Giambattista Beccaria, besides enjoying the company of one Madame Trana.5  He continued his tour via Vercelli to Milan, where he spent a week, having been invited by Count Belgioioso on the orders of the Empress Maria Theresa. He stayed at the palace of the Countess Teresa Simonetta, the morganatic wife of the Duke of Modena (then Governor of Lombardy), and spent much time with the Archduke Joseph. On 16 March he reached Florence where he stayed with Horace Mann, whose hospitality was constrained by the 'strictness with which Lent is observed in Italy'. The Duke entertained the British community, and helped the traveller James Bruce obtain permission to inspect monuments in Algiers.6 Of local dignitaries he met the Imperial commissary, Marshal Adorno Botta, from whom he learned of the serious famine in Naples. Early in April the Duke made a little tour of Tuscany, in the course of which he declined to kill a boar on a grand hunt held in his honour, and he visited Lord Fordwich (later 3rd Earl Cowper), at whose country house he heard the castrato Giovanni Manzuoli7 (whom the Duke subsequently invited to England).  On his way to Rome the Duke attended a reception at Siena (where he was much taken with the two nieces of Porzia Sansedoni).8 He spent two weeks in Rome, staying with a China merchant, Francesco Barazza, who had once acted as a Hanoverian spy.9 Both the Pope and Cardinal Albani duly indulged their Royal visitor. The Pope presented him with tapestries, mosaics and prints,10 and gave him a reception in the gardens of the Quirinale, besides staging for his benefit a special horse-race on the Corso. During the Holy Week service of the tavole dei poveri the Duke, dressed in black, was said to have bowed to the Pope who nodded significantly in return.11 Cardinal Albani gave a reception12 and presented the Duke with a gold snuff-box bearing an antique cameo of Alexander the Great. Albani had previously recommended Thomas Jenkins and Winckelmann as his ciceroni,13 but the Prussian antiquary, understandably, had little respect for the Royal visitor.14 At Rome the Duke sat to Batoni (three replicas; Clark/Bowron 273-5) and Nathaniel Dance, and his bust was carved by Nollekens (all in the Royal Collection). The Duke declined to visit Naples, which was still recovering from famine, instead returning to Florence, where he commissioned Thomas Patch to paint the Departure of the Duke of York from Sir Horace Mann (untraced).15 He continued his way northwards, being received at the Palazzo Aldovrandi (now Montanari) at Bologna,16 before spending two weeks in Parma, staying with the marchese Pallavicini in the Piazza S.Fiora.17 He was richly entertained by the Duke of Parma and his minister Du Tillot, whose morganatic wife, the marchesa Malaspina, found particular favour with him. By prolonging his stay the Duke had little time to spend at Mantua, Verona or Vicenza as he hurried to Venice, where there were 'great and most expensive preparations to entertain him'.18  He arrived on 26 May with the British resident John Murray (who had met him at Verona), and took lodgings in consul Udny's palace by the Rialto. Venice particularly suited the Duke's temperament. He regularly attended the theatre and was fêted at numerous receptions. He enjoyed the Ascension Day celebrations and a grand Regatta was held in his honour on 4 June. The Duke's Venetian escorts told the Doge he was a lively and interested traveller, but confidential reports described him as a libertine, 'aliquanto leggiero di cervello'.19 On 16 June the Duke sailed to Padua where he stayed for two weeks at the British resident's country house, attending further receptions. He sat to Richard Brompton for a conversation piece showing him with a group of distinguished British travellers (see Brompton). From Padua the Duke briefly visited Vicenza for the Corpus Domini procession on 21 June, and then returned for two days to Venice. A separate account was printed concerning the Duke's stay in Venice, the Raccolta di tutto quello fu stampato in questa citta nell'occasione della venuta di Sua Altezza Reale Odoardo Augusto Duca di York (the most complete copy in the BL).  On 5 July he returned to Milan, where he again stayed in the palace of Countess Simonetta. He was seen playing the violin accompanied by the 'cellist Piantaniola,20 and he talked with the Marchesa Teresa Beccaria, later considering the translation of her husband's political writings into English.21 He spent two more weeks in Turin, where he was often accompanied by Madame de Brusasque, and thereafter he returned to Madame Durazzo in Genoa for three weeks,22 before embarking for Dover on 17 August 1764. The Duke appeared to have benefitted little from his excursion. The subsequent director of the Uffizi confided that the Duke did not appreciate 'Le cose belle dell'Italia ma viaggia per passotempo'.23 Gibbon thought him 'un jeune fou' who would have been better kept at home and Horace Walpole reflected that 'York seems a title fated to sit on silly heads'. It was while returning to Italy that the Duke died at Monaco on 17 September 1767. The Marquess of Kildare, then in Italy, was among those who felt some relief; he had not relished the prospect of the Duke's stay in Turin; 'they really hate him wherever he has been; his behaviour all over Italy has been abominable'.24
Yorke and his family arrived at Venice on 14 November 1779,1 and were in Rome on 1 January 1780 when John Coxe Hippisley met them (Mr, Mrs and Miss Yorke). They were, he wrote, 'a very sensible and pleasing family, & tho possessing a fortune of thrice [Sir John Steuart of Allanbank's] rent Roll, yet as some generations have possessed the same, they live rationally by instinct'; they were accompanied by Parson Wheeler, 'a good sort of informed man'.2 The Yorke family had just returned to Rome from Naples on 29 April 1780, and were still in Rome on 17 May.3 John Yorke's visit to Italy was probably made for reasons of health, since in September 1780 he was writing that he had felt 'unequal to the fatigues of attendance' at the House of Commons.4
Philip Yorke, grandson of the Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, travelled in Italy in 1778-9 accompanied by his Swiss tutor, Colonel Wittestein. He recorded his grand tour in a journal of 'Travels thro Holland, Germany, Italy & Switzerland &c. in the years 1777, 1778 and 1779' (it is now almost illegible),1 and an anonymous travel journal now at Yale is probably also by Philip Yorke.2  He came through Holland and Germany and was first briefly in Italy in 1778 when he attended the Ascension festivities in Venice. He went on to Switzerland through Verona and Milan. In August 1778 he was back in Milan and he proceeded through Lucca to Florence in October.3 He arrived in Rome on 21 October, and was soon following a course of antiquities under James Byres, who became his friend and agent. 'If you should wish to make any purchase in the virtu way', he told his uncle, 'Mr Beyers would be a very proper man for a commission'.4 By November Yorke had met Thomas Bowdler and was wanting to be remembered to John Strange, the British resident at Venice.5 On 29 December he left Rome with Bowdler and went to Naples, whence they visited Pompeii and Paestum.6 It was at Paestum on 28 January 1779 that Yorke met John Soane, an architect he was later to employ, and while Yorke admired the 'magnificent' Doric temples, Soane measured them.7 Yorke returned to Rome and began buying pictures.  He sat to Batoni, the portrait dated 1779 (Clark/Bowron 411; priv. coll.) and commissioned two large landscapes from Thomas Jones (views of Baiae and Lake Avernus) which were to be delivered to Byres.8 By April Byres had in hand for him six views of Rome by Lusieri, tables by Vinelli, '8 pastes of Mr Yorke's portrait & 2 sulphurs' and the portrait of Yorke and Wittestein by Smuglewicz9 (sold Christie's, 16 Apr. 1982). The paste was probably by J.A. Pichler, who is known to have drawn 'Monsieur Torck'.10 On 17 April Byres was writing to Yorke in Bologna, where he was proposing to join him.9 Yorke met Farinelli there, before continuing northwards through Parma and Turin to cross the Alps at Mont Cenis.  On 15 September 1779 'Yorke', doubtless Philip, had just returned to England from Italy 'where he has been dangerously ill of a fever'.11 Yorke remained in business with Byres, who in 1781 was seeking a set of busts for his library and paying on his behalf for a view of Naples from Lusieri and a view of Tivoli by Delane; in 1784 Byres sent him tables by Blasi, two landscapes by Jacob More (the larger one of Lake Albano)12 and a copy by Alexander Nasmyth (whom Yorke had sponsored in Italy).13

Arthur Young had previously made separate visits to the Pyrenees in 1787 and to France in 1788, before he spent three months in northern Italy at the end of 1789. His Travels contain the diary of an energetic democrat in quest of useful knowledge, for whom the elaborate rituals of Italian society were superfluous. When he wished to discuss farming, he did not wish to encounter 'a rich citizen, at his country villa,' nor, at a gathering of an agricultural society at Milan, was he impressed by 'a goodly company of i Marchesi, i Conti, i Cavalieri, i Abati, but not one close clipped wing, or a dirty pair of breeches'. Though he appreciated the cheapness of Venice, his heart 'could not expand in such a place: an admirable monument of human industry, but not a theatre for the feelings of a farmer'. The journey to Bologna was 'among the most disagreeable days I ever experienced,' the roads being so 'infamously bad'. Although his impatience with Italian impracticality was never overcome, there were some tranquil moments. He was very moved by the Venus de Medici and was treated with kindness by the British diplomats, John, Lord Hervey, in Florence and John Trevor in Turin. His particular interest was aroused by a collection of fossils made by the Padre Pini in Milan and by a cheese manufactory owned by the Conte Schiaffinati at Vicomero near Parma. And even a farmer, he wrote, would wish to be the cicisbeo of the 'young, lively and beautiful' Signora Lamberti in Milan (Young, Travels, 228-300).
Following storm damage to his sugar plantations in Antigua, William Young travelled abroad with his young wife. Horace Mann described them in Florence in August 1752: Mrs Young was 'rather a fine lady of Kentish breed, refined in France', but her husband was 'a roaring rich West Indian', making 'a figure' in Florence and giving weekly concerts. He talked of his money 'and swaggers in his gait as if both his coat pockets were full of it. He buys pictures upon his own judgement, and declares it to be better than anybody's.' He bought a Danae attributed to Titian from Ignazio Hugford, but it was considered worthless by Mengs. Mann also referred to Young's 'organ, which cost him three thousand, and his electrical instruments, which cost forty thousand pounds'.1 He was presumably the 'Young' in Capua on 2 December 1752,2 apparently on his way to Rome from Naples, and the Mr Young mentioned in Rome by James Russel in January 1753.3 Pancrazi dedicated a plate of his Antichita Siciliane [1751-2] to 'Gulielmo Young'.
William Young was in France in 1771 and entered Italy in 1772. He travelled through Genoa, Florence and Rome with Dr Patrick Russell, whom he had met wearing eastern dress at a playhouse in Marseilles (Russell had previously been in Capua on 8 January 1772).1 In Rome Young recorded meeting James Byres, the Abbé Grant, William Parsons and Charles Townley, 'a most elegant gentleman', with whom he proceeded to make a remarkable tour through every port of Apulia and Calabria, still an unfamiliar part of Italy. Young had left Rome late in April 1772 accompanied by the artist John Brown and they passed through Capua on 26 April.2 Townley was lodging with Young in Naples on 11-12 May 1772.3 At the end of the tour Townley returned to Naples from Amantea on 21 June, but Young and Brown sailed to Sicily on the 19th and visited Malta in July. On their return they stayed a month in Palermo where Young wrote up his journal, entitled A Journal of a Summer's Excursion by the road of Montecassino to Naples, and from there over all the southern parts of Italy, Sicily and Malta, in the year 1772, of which twenty copies were to be privately printed. William Hamilton thought it 'the most faithfull and best account of Sicily he ever read', but it is somewhat ponderous, enthusiastic descriptions of the wilder landscapes appearing amid copious classical quotation. 'Travelling through a part of Italy visited but by few and described by none', Young began, 'I thought it incumbent on me to take such notes as might thereafter give an adequate idea of the state and face of the country'; he concluded with some melancholy reflections on the corruption and disorder of Sicilian society. The original MS has a number of small water-colour illustrations by Young himself, and more of his Sicilian water-colours are in the BMPL. Young and Brown left Palermo on 1 September and arrived in Naples on the 14th (see John Brown). On 10 October Townley paid Young for medals from Sicily,2 and Young and Brown were still in Naples in December, intending to return to Rome.4  Young had meanwhile met Richard Neville (later Lord Braybrooke) with whom, apparently, he made further excursions from Naples, including one to Paestum; Young later gave Neville some of the drawings he had made there. A conversation piece attributed to Wickstead painted at Rome c.1773 (Springhill, Ulster, and Audley End), is said to show Young with John Staples, James Byres, Thomas Orde and Richard Neville.5 On 10 March 1773 Young arrived in Venice with John Staples.6 Young had returned home by April 1774, when he gave his mother a printed copy of his Journal.

He had arrived in Florence with David and Mrs Garrick and was in Naples on 31 December 1763 (Martin jnl.MSS, 16 Nov., 31 Dec. 1763). In 1794 a Mr Young was an under-secretary to the Grand Duke of Tuscany at Florence. Young and his brother and two sisters were 'children of the late Mr Young, master of mathematics to the Grand Duke's naval officers. After the father's death his Royal Highness placed the two sons at college; the eldest is now one of the private secretaries to the Emperor of Germany, the other is in the army. Their two sisters were ladies in waiting to the Grand Duchess [Maria Louisa], consort to Leopold' (Brooke, Observations, 122).

Mr Younger was to leave Rome on 28 September 1730, having had 'many dealings' with the Jacobites; his departure for England was reported on 12 October (with Hall, Robert Hewer and How).1 'Mr Younger a Clergyman' was in Venice with Hall on 1 December.2

The Zachary who went with a Mr Long and Joshua Pickersgill from Turin to see the Basilica of Superga,1 was probably one of the '2 Messrs Zacchary' in Venice on 27 July 1764, then preparing to leave.2



































































































































































































































































































